## WPKI

## WAP-217-WPKI Version 24-Apr-2001

## Wireless Application Protocol Public Key Infrastructure Definition

You may use this document or any part of the document for internal or educational purposes only, provided you do not modify, edit or take out of context the information in this document in any manner. You may not use this document in any other manner without the prior written permission of the WAP Forum™. The WAP Forum authorises you to copy this document, provided that you retain all copyright and other proprietary notices contained in the original materials on any copies of the materials and that you comply strictly with these terms. This copyright permission does not constitute an endorsement of the products or services offered by you .

The WAP Forum™ assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions in this document. In no event shall the WAP Forum be liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever arising out of or in connection with the use of this information .

WAP Forum™ members have agreed to use reasonable endeavors to disclose in a timely manner to the WAP Forum the existence of all intellectual property rights (IPR's) essential to the present document. The members do not have an obligation to conduct IPR searches. This information is p ublicly available to members and non-members of the WAP Forum and may be found on the "WAP IPR Declarations" list at http://www.wapforum.org/what/ipr.htm. Essential IPR is available for license on the basis set out in the schedule to the WAP Forum Application Form.

Comments regarding this document can be submitted to the WAP Forum™ in the manner published at http://www.wapforum.org/.

| Document History            | Document History   |
|-----------------------------|--------------------|
| WAP-217-WPKI-20000303-d     | Proposed           |
| WAP-217_100-WPKI-20000809-d | SCD                |
| WAP-217_101-WPKI-20001026-d | SCD                |
| WAP-217_102-WPKI-20010424-d | SCD                |
| WAP-217-WPKI-20010424-a     | Current            |

## 1  Scope

The Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) is a result of continuous work to define an industry-wide specification for developing applications that operate over wireless communication networks. The scope for the WAP Forum is to define a set of specifications to be used by service applications. The wireless market is growing very quickly, and reaching new customers and services. To enable operators and manufacturers to meet the challenges in advanced services, differentiation and fast/flexible service creation WAP Forum defines a set of protocols in transport, security, transaction, session and application layers. For additional information on the WAP architecture, please refer to ' Wireless Application Protocol Architecture Specification' [WAPARCH].

WAP security functionality includes the Wireless Transport Layer Security [WTLS] and application level security, accessi ble using the Wireless Markup Language Script [WMLScript].  The security provided in WAP can be of various levels. In the simplest case anonymous key exchange is used for creation of an encrypted channel between server and client; in the next level a server provides a certificate mapping back to an entity trusted by the client; and finally the client itself may possess a private key and public key certificate enabling it to identify itself to other entities in the network. This document is concerned with the infrastructure and procedures required to enable the trust relationships needed for authentication of servers and clients. The term server used here is not limited to WAP gateways and origin servers but may include third parties and content/service providers using the WAP protocols.

The general model is adaptable to many certificate types including X509v3, X9.68 (currently in draft) and the certificate format defined in WTLS.  The WTLS certificate has the advantage of being very compact, easily implemented in code, and easily parsed which may be important for initial implementations of WAP clients.  In addition, to the extent possible, the WAP PKI will work interchangeably with existing X.509v3 certificates in existing Internet applications, in order to leverage the existing Internet PKIs. Any new format that requires major changes to the installed base of certificate-processing products and CA infrastructure is unlikely to be easily adopted in a short timeframe.

For this reason the general model for this version is that server certificates will use the WTLS certificate format whereas client certificates will use X.509 format, but as far as possible will not be sent over the air nor stored on the client.

## 2  Document Status

This document is available online in the following formats:

- PDF format at http://www.wapforum.org/.

## 2.1   Copyright Notice

## 2.2   Errata

## 2.3   Comments

Comments regarding this document can be submitted to WAP Forum in the manner published at http://www.wapforum.org/.

## 3  References

## 3.1 Normative References

- [CERTPROF] ' WAP Certificate and CRL Profiles Specification, ' WAP Forum, Draft Version  18February-2000 URL: http://www.wapforum.org/
- [E2E] "WAP Transport Layer End-to-end Security Specification," WAP Forum, Draft Version 14-February-2000 URL: http://www.wapforum.org/
- [HASH] 'Information technology - Security techniques - Hash-functions - Part 3: Dedicated hash-functions,' ISO/IEC 10118-3 1996.
- [LDAPURL] 'The LDAP URL Format,' IETF RFC 2255, T. Howes. M. Smith, December 1997. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2255.txt .
- [LDAPSRCH] 'The String Representation of LDAP Search Filters,' IETF RFC 2254, T. Howes, December 1997. URL : ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2254.tx t.
- [RFC1113] "Privacy Enhancement for Internet Electronic Mail: Part I -- Message Encipherment and Authentication Procedures," IETF RFC 1113, J. Linn, August 1989. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc1113.txt.
- [RFC1521] "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) Part One: Mechanisms for Specifying and Describing the Format of Internet Message Bodies," N. Borenstein, N. Freed, September 1993. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc1521.txt .
- [RFC2119] ' Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels ,' IETF RFC 2119, S. Bradner, March 1997. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2119.txt .
- [RFC2314] "PKCS #10: Certification Request Syntax Version 1.5," IETF RFC 2314, B. Kaliski, March 1998. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2314.txt .
- [RFC2459] "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and CRL Profile," R. Housley, et al, January 1999. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2459.txt .
- [RFC2560] 'Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure - Online Certificate Status Protocol OCSP ,' IETF RFC 2560, M. Myers, R. Ankney, A. Malpani, S. Galperin, C. Adams, June 1999. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2560.txt .
- [FIPS 180-1] Federal Information Processing Standards Publication  (FIPS  PUB) 180-1, Secure Hash Standard, 17 April 1995. [Supersedes FIPS PUB 180 dated 11 May 1993.]
- [WAPARCH] 'WAP Architecture Specification,' WAP Forum, 30-April-1998. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/
- [WAPPROV] "WAP Provisioning Architecture," WAP Forum, 19-February-2000. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/
- [WAPWTLS] 'Wireless Transport Layer Security Specification,' WAP Forum, 5 November 1999. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/

[WIM] 'WAP Identity Module Specification,' WAP Forum, 5 November 1999. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/

[WMLScript] 'WMLScript Language Specification,' WAP Forum, 4 November-1999. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/

[WMLSCrypt] 'WML Script Crypto API,' WAP Forum, 5 November 1999. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/

[WSP] 'Wireless Session Protocol,' WAP Forum, 5 th November 1999. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/

## 3.2 Informative References

[ISO9594-8] 'Information Technology -- Open Systems Interconnections -- The Directory: Authentication Framework', ISO/IEC International Standard 9594-8 | ITU-T Recommendation X.509 (1997).

[MExE99] 'Mobile Station Application Execution Environment; Functional Description; Stage 2,' 3G TS 23.057 version 1.6.0, Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP). URL: http://www.3gpp.org

[RFC1321] 'The MD5 Message Digest Algorithm," , IETF RFC 1321, R. Rivest, April 1992. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc1321.txt

[RFC2510] 'Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate Management Protocols' , IETF RFC 2510, C. Adams and S. Farrell, March 1999. URL:  ftp://ftp.isi.edu/innotes/rfc2510.txt .

[RFC2511] "Certificate Request Message Format," IETF RFC 2511, M. Myers, C. Adams, D. Solo and D. Kemp, March 1999. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2511txt .

[RFC2527] 'Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure  Certificate Policy and Certification Practices Framework,' IETF RFC 2527, S. Chokhani  and W. Ford , March 1999. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2527.txt .

[RFC2797] 'Certificate Management Messages over CMS ', IETF RFC 2797, M. Myers, et.al., April 2000. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2797.txt .

[WAPPUSH] "WAP Push OTA Protocol," WAP Forum, 17-February-2000. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/

[WCMP] 'Wireless Control Message Protocol Specification,' WAP Forum, 4-August-1999. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/

## 4  Definitions And Abbreviations

## 4.1   Definitions

For the purposes of this specification the following definitions apply.

Keywords like MUST, SHOULD etc. are to be interpreted as in [RFC2119].

## Certification Authority

A certification authority is an entity that issues/updates/revokes public key bearing certificates in response to authenticated requests from legitimate registration authorities. The CA holds a private key used to sign domain member key bearing certificates.

## CA Information Service

A service that provides the trusted CA information, which includes the CA root certificate and information necessary to validate the CA root certificate.

## PKI Portal

This is the entity that performs the RA and/or CA functions defined in this specification. It is both WAP and PKI aware.

## Proof of possession

In order to avoid certain substitution attacks a PKI portal may require that clients (in the PKI sense) demonstrate that they possess the private key corresponding to the public key they wish to be certified. This can be done in many ways, e.g. by having the client sign a challenge.

## Public key validation

Public key validation is a procedure that does arithmetic tests on the components of a candidate public key to provide assurance that it conforms to the specifications of a standard. Note that this mechanism is currently not widely deployed, but may, in future, become more frequently used.

## Registration Authority

A registration authority is an entity authorised to make requests to issue/revoke/update certificates to a CA. The registration authority can be considered similar to an account manager in function and is responsible for member enrolment and/or attribute assignments.

## Subscriber Identity Module

A tamper resistant device in a wireless system holding subscriber identity and authentication information. The SIM card can also be used to run applications needing a secure environment.

## Trusted CA Information

This refers to the information which is stored by a PKI entity and which indicates that a given certification authority is trusted as a root CA by that entity. This must include a public key and typically also includes a name and a validity period, often stored in the form of a self-signed

certificate. In this specification, the term is also used when discussing a transfer format for this information, in particular for use when downloading trusted CA information over the air.

## WAP Identity Module

The WAP Identity Module (WIM) is used in performing WTLS and application level security functions, and especially, to store and process information needed for user identification and authentication. The WPKI may use the WIM for secure storage of certificates and keys.

## 4.2   Abbreviations

For the purposes of this specification the following abbreviations apply.

| AKID      | Authority Key IDentitfier                          |
|-----------|----------------------------------------------------|
| CA        | Certification Authority                            |
| CMC       | Certificate Management over CMS                    |
| CMP       | Certificate Management Protocol                    |
| CPS       | Certification Practice Statement                   |
| CRL       | Certificate Revocation List                        |
| DER       | Distinguished Encoding Rules (ASN.1)               |
| EC        | Elliptic Curve                                     |
| GSM       | Global System for Mobile Communication             |
| ID        | Identifier                                         |
| ME        | Mobile Equipment                                   |
| OCSP      | On-line Certificate Status Protocol                |
| OTA       | Over-the-air                                       |
| PIN       | Personal Identification Number                     |
| POP       | Proof Of Possession                                |
| PKI       | Public Key Infrastructure                          |
| PKV       | Public Key Validation                              |
| RA        | Registration Authority                             |
| RSA       | RSA (Rivest, Shamir, Adleman) public key algorithm |
| SHA-1     | Secure Hash Algorithm 1                            |
| SIM       | Subscriber Identity Module                         |
| SMS       | Short Message Service                              |
| TSP       | Telephony Service Provider                         |
| TTP       | Trusted Third Party                                |
| WAP       | Wireless Application Protocol                      |
| WIM       | Wireless Identity Module                           |
| WML       | Wireless Markup Language                           |
| WMLScript | Wireless Markup Language Script                    |
| WMLSCrypt | Wireless Markup Language Script Crypto API         |
| WDP       | Wireless Datagram Protocol                         |
| WTLS      | Wireless Transport Layer Security                  |

## 5  Introduction

The goal of the WAP PKI is to reuse existing PKI standards where available, and only develop new standards where necessary to support the specific requirements of WAP.

In addition to those security documents already produced [WAPWTLS], [WMLSCrypt], [WIM] the WAP PKI consists of the following documents:

- WAP PKI Definition (this document)
- WAP Certificate and CRL Profiles Specification [CERTPROF]

The purpose of this document is to define the framework of the WAP PKI. It is divided into a number of sections as follows: -

- WAP PKI Model, providing a framework for the implementation of the WAP PKI and the relationship between the wireless components of the PKI defined in WAP, and the existing Int ernet components defined elsewhere. (e.g. IEFT PKIX)
- PKI Operations, describing the operations supported by the model such as RootCA key installation and client registration processes
- Static conformance tables, specifying which feature combinations must or may be implemented

## 6  WAP PKI Model

This section gives an overview of the PKI model being used in the WAP environment. It includes a partial walkthrough of the generic processes involved when a WAP client registers in a, (for it), new PKI.

The current WAP PKI model defines the functionality needed to manage the security functionality defined in WAP1.2. This can be summarised as follows: -

- CA Public Key Certificates used for WTLS Class 2
- Client Public Key Certificates used for WTLS Class 3
- Client Public Key Certificates used in conjunction with WMLScript signText.

Future versions of the WAP PKI Model will be enhanced to support signed content models for protecting the download of WMLScript and WTA Scripts to the client, and functionality to support application level end-to-end confidentiality and integrity. It is currently assumed that clients will not possess keys to allow end to end confidentiality, nor will they support verification of signatures on scripts.

The general model adopted in the current version of the WPKI is as follows: -

- WTLS Server and Root CA certificates stored in the device will be according to WTLSCertificate defined in [WAPWTLS]
- Client certificates (WTLS &amp; application) and CA Roots which are to be sent OTA and/or stored in WAP client devices will be according to X.509 as profiled in [CERTPROF]
- Client certificates (WTLS &amp; application) and CA Roots stored in servers will be according to X.509 as profiled in [RFC2459]
- Storage of the certificate URL in the device, rather than the full client certificate, is the preferred model, when X.509 format certificates would otherwise be expected to be transferred OTA.
- Storage of X.509 client certificates in the device is expected to be the exception, unless they are provisioned on the device, through the [WIM] for example.

Certificates can be stored in several locations on the client, on a WIM (either on the same ICC as the SIM or not in a client that supports a SIM) or on the client itself.

Note:When the necessary functionality is defined by WAP, future versions of this specification will also require that the client be able to access certificates on a SIM (for clients that support a SIM).

We now present some illustrative examples to show "typical" WPKI configurations and how these relate to WTLS and signText. Note that other configurations are possible, and will be used, so as to match the PKI requirements for particular environments.

## 6.1 WAP PKI Functions

## 6.1.1 WTLS Class 2

The Security layer protocol in the WAP architecture is called the Wireless Transport Layer Security, WTLS. The WTLS layer operates above the transport protocol layer.

The primary goal of the WTLS layer is to provide privacy, data integrity and authentication between two communicating applications. WTLS provides functionality similar to TLS 1.0 and incorporates new

features such as datagram support, optimised handshake and dynamic key refreshing. The WTLS protocol is optimised for low-bandwidth bearer networks with relatively long latency.

WTLS Class 2 provides the capability for the client to authenticate the identity of the gateway it is communicating with. The following diagram gives a generic overview of the steps necessary to enable WTLS class 2.

Currently WTLS operates between a WAP client and a gateway (Case 1 below). Future versions of WAP will allow a WTLS session to terminate beyond the gateway at an application or origin server (Case 2 below).

Figure 1 - WTLS Class 2 WPKI

In the diagram above the device  is provisioned with (or loads OTA) some CA Root Public Key information. The WAP Gateway Generates a key pair - public key &amp; private key and:

- (1) Gateway sends certificate request to PKI Portal
- (3) CA send Gateway Public Certificate to Gateway (may be via Portal)
- (2) portal Confirms ID and forwards request to CA

Case 1 - Two Phase Security:

- (4) WTLS Session established between Phone and Gateway
- (5) SSL/TLS session established between Gateway and Server

Case 2 - 'End to End Security model':

- (6) Server sends certificate request to PKI Portal
- (7) Portal Confirms ID and forwards request to CA
- (8) CA sends Server Public Certificate to Server

(9) WTLS Session Established from Phone to Server (routing is via Gateway, but communication is opaque to Gateway).

## 6.1.2 WTLS Class 3

WTLS Class 3 authentication is (from the PKI viewpoint) almost the same as the configuration shown below for SignText - the difference being that the client's private key is used to sign a "challenge" from the WTLS server. Both direct to gateway and end-to-end (to server) modes are possible.

## 6.1.3 signText

signText provides a mechanism for a client device to create a digital signature of text sent to it using WMLScript.

Figure 2 - SignText and WPKI

In this case root CA Public Keys must be provisioned (or loaded OTA) in both the device and the server.

- (1) Phone requests Certificate from PKI portal (via gateway).
- (2) Portal confirms ID and passes request to CA
- (3) CA generates User Certificate and sends Certificate URL to client. (Alternatively the CA can send the entire client certificate to the device [to be stored on the WIM for example])
- (4) CA populates Database with User Public Key Certificate (if necessary)
- (5) User signs transaction at client, and sends transaction, signature &amp; CertificateURL (or certificate) to server (logically via gateway)
- (7) CA Database sends user certificate to database (if necessary).
- (6) Server uses CertificateURL to retrieve User Certificate from database (if not already in possession of certificate)

·

## 6.2 Private Key Capability

WAP clients are assumed to be able to have (at least) two different signing keys - one for WTLS client authentication and one for application layer signing (signText). It is envisaged that almost all clients will fit into one of the following classes:

- No private keys
- Two private keys (one for authentication and one for signing)
- One private key (either for authentication or signing)

That is, cases where clients have more than two private keys are not considered further (though may be supported).

In order for a WAP client's signature (whether for authentication or signing) to be trusted by servers, it will sometimes be necessary for the client to be registered in a new PKI, which is trusted by the server. This demonstrates the need for an application layer PKI registration functionality. Note that a client who registers in such a PKI does not necessarily need to trust that PKI, so that installation of trusted  CA information may not be required. (Of course, the client may need to be able to trust the PKI in order to authenticate a WTLS server.) The client will however have to be able to identify itself in the server's trusted PKI.

We use the term PKI portal for any PKI entity (typically an RA, CA or OCSP [RFC2560] responder) with which the WAP client communicates during PKI operations. There is no assumption that the client communicates directly with the PKI portal, though any security mechanisms applied (e.g. signature) must be end-to-end between the client and PKI portal. The PKI portal need not be co-located with either the service provider or operator.

In many cases, registration of WAP clients in a PKI will have occurred as part of the provisioning of a WAP device, however this specification also provides mechanisms that allow this registration to be carried out, over the air, after the device has already been provisioned. A "typical" PKI registration therefore may involve the following types of interchanges:

- Client contacts a service provider (e.g. a content provider which supplies some banking application) attempting to use a service that requires a client signature.
- that it should contact a  PKI portal (maybe also providing some PKI information - e.g. a CA name).

Service provider requires client to be registered in its chosen PKI; Service provider indicates to client

- Client contacts PKI portal and submits certification request; PKI portal acknowledges receipt of request. The acknowledgement message gives some guidance to the client as to what will happen next.
- Some time later the client reconnects to the service provider. When producing a signature the client also includes information to identify its certificate.
- Normal certification processes occur in the PKI; this may result in near instant certification or may involve a significant time lapse. (The details of the internal PKI operations are out-of-scope here, but are covered by e.g. PKIX.)
- The service provider may use this to retrieve the client's certificate from a repository and can then verify the client's signature.

The diagram below shows this style of interaction.

Figure 3 - PKI Portal Interactions

## 7   PKI Operations

This section describes the PKI operations that are standardized in the WAP context. Note that supporting just these operations does not provide an imp lementation with a "full" PKI, other standards (e.g. PKIX, [RFC2459]) specify protocols and data formats that can be used in building and deploying a PKI. The approach taken is to minimize the amount of new specification, in order to enable WAP PKI to be deployed quickly.

We first discuss handling of trusted CA information, then WTLS server certification and finally client registration and certificate distribution and certificate URLs.

## 7.1 Trusted  CA Information Handling

Trusted CA information means the information necessary in order to verify a public key certificate issued by that CA, or by CA subordinate to the trusted CA. This information necessarily includes a public key and a name but MAY include other information. In order to provide integrity, truste d CA information is downloaded in self-signed format - note that this does not provide authentication of the data, only integrity. This section specifies two mechanisms for providing the authentication of the trusted CA information, one based on hashing and one based on signing. It is important to note that nothing here provides the "trusted" part of the trusted CA information - trust is provided by the deployed system (including e.g. user acceptance of a CA).

The CA information SHOULD be distributed (i.e. downloaded) to the clients through the appropriate WAP defined protocols such as Provisioning [WAPPROV] or WSP. For Provisioning, the CA Information Service SHOULD be trusted. For WSP, the CA information is pulled when a URL is presented to a user, and only if the URL is not presented in a Push message. The basic server initiated delivery methods such as Push [WAPPUSH] MUST NOT be used.

The client SHOULD accept the CA information only if the CA information is verified through one of the verification methods defined in this specification, and the CA information is delivered through the appropriate WAP defined protocols, and the CA Information Service is trusted. If the CA Information Service is not trusted, sufficient user interface functions must be provided to assist the user to make the informed decision on whether or not the downloaded CA information can be trusted before acceptance.

Even if the CA Information Service is trusted, the user MAY be prompted to confirm the acceptance of a new trusted CA information content. If the CA Information Service is not trusted, the user MUST be prompted to confirm the acceptance of a new CA information content and MUST be warned of the security impact of accepting it. If a new CA information content is rejected, it MUST NOT be used in the client.

This specification does not mandate the mechanisms by which a client determines that a CA Information Service is "trusted", or "not trusted". In fact, as "trust" is not a binary relationship, implementers MAY choose to support additional levels of "trust" for CA Information Services.

Clients MUST be able to understand and process the CA information content types, including application/vnd.wap.hashed-certificate and application/vnd.wap.signed-certificate. Client MAY be able to understand and process the application/vnd.wap.rollover-certificate content type.

Clients SHOULD provide mechanisms for deletion of CA information, although this specification does not define such mechanisms. Note that as substantial denial-of-service can result from accidental deletion of CA information, implementers SHOULD take as much care with deletion of CA information, as they take with addition of CA information.

## 7.1.1 Client Handling of Trusted CA Information

WAP Clients:

- MUST support long-term storage and local administration of trusted CA information provided (e.g. provisioned) in self-signed WTLSCertificate format,
- MAY support long-term storage and local administration of trusted CA information provided (e.g. provisioned) in self-signed X.509 format

The details of the local administration of this data are out of scope of this specification.

## 7.1.2 Server Handling of Trusted CA Information

WTLS Servers and verifiers of signText() output:

- MAY support long-term storage and local administration of trusted CA information provided (e.g. provisioned) in self-signed WTLSCertificate format,
- MUST support long-term storage and local administration of trusted CA information provided (e.g. provisioned) in self-signed X.509 format

The details of the local administration of this data are out of scope of this specification.

## 7.1.3 Out of band hash verification method

Trusted CA information MAY be represented as a self-signed X.509 public key certificate or as a selfsigned WTLSCertificate.

The format (see [WAPWTLS] for details of this notation) of the hashed data is:

```
struct { CharacterSet character_set; opaque displayName <1..2^8-1>; } CertDisplayName; enum { sha1 (0), 255 } HashAlgorithm ; struct { uint8 version; CertDisplayName displayName; Certificate trustedCACert; opaque cainfo_url <0..2^8-1>; HashAlgorithm hash_alg; } TBHTrustedCAInfo;
```

| Item          | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|---------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Version       | The version of this data structure. For this specification it MUST be 1.                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| DisplayName   | A name for the CA, suitable for display on the WAP client device.                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| TrustedCACert | (c) Copyright Wireless Application Forum, Ltd, 2001 All Rights Reserved The CA Certificate. WAP clients MUST support the WTLSCertificate format and MAY support the X.509 format. If using X.509 format, this MUST meet the profile specified in [CERTPROF] |

| Item       | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| cainfo_url | the X.509 format. If using X.509 format, this MUST meet the profile specified in [CERTPROF] A URL, which MUST be supplied which specifies where the client can get further information about the CA. This URL MUST be potentially accessible from the WAP client. The intention here is to enable the PKI portal to give pointers to the CA's CPS etc |
| hash_alg   | The algorithm used to hash, this MUST be SHA-1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

The encoding of this is to be the value of an application/vnd.wap.hashed-certificate MIME type.

The client MUST also ensure that the signature on the self-signed certificate is correct before using the public key contained in the self-signed certificate.

The security of this mechanism consists in downloading the CA information over the air and having the user enter the "display" form of the hash of this information via e.g. the keyboard. The hash value itself is not sent over the air and MUST be sent to the user via an out-of-band channel.

For the purposes of this specification, receiving data out-of-band means simply that the data is not received via a channel that can be attacked at the same time as the in-band (WAE) channel without the attacker expending significant additional resource based on an entirely different attack mechanism. For example, in the context of WAP over GSM/CSD, an unauthenticated SMS channel is considered in-band and SHOULD NOT be used to distribute the hash value.

The device must do whatever possible to ensure that the hash has, in fact, been received via an out-of-band mechanism. The mechanisms used to enforce this are out of scope of this specification.

After the display form of the hash is entered and the CA information has been received (which can occur in either order); the device MUST hash the information received over the air and compare (the leftmost bits of) this against the hash value that was entered.

If they match then the CA information can be accepted. In this case, the CA information SHOULD be displayed to the user and the user SHOULD be allowed to accept or reject the CA information.

If the hash values do not match, then the device SHOULD inform the user, and offer the opportunity to enter the correct hash, either immediately or at a later time. The user SHOULD be presented with the option to cancel the operation, in which case the rejected information MUST be deleted.

In order to allow a long value to be entered by the user, we include in the display form of the hash some checksum bits. The device MUST check that these are correct as the display form of the hash is entered, and MUST only accept the entered value when the checksum validation succeeds. If the user enters an incorrect value, the device MUST inform the user and allow re-entry of the relevant (part of) the display form of the hash.

Note: The checksum allows schemes where the user enters the hash value before downloading the CA information.

If the user enters a sufficient number of bits, then this mechanism is secure.

Users MUST enter exactly 80 "effective" bits of hash, which extracted from the display form and are the leftmost 80 bits of the SHA-1 hash of the CA information.

Let "hash" be the SHA-1 hash of the encoding of (the encoding of) a TBHTrustedCAInfo structure. This consists of 160 bits (h 0 ,…h159, in network byte order, h 0 being the leftmost bit).

The display form of the hash consists of 30 decimal digits, constructed of 5 blocks of 6 digits. The leftmost 5 digits of each block represent 16 bits of the effective hash, (i.e. can take the value '00000' to '65535' decimal), the sixth digit of each block is a check digit for the block. Block zero consists of h 0 to h 15 (with h0 being the most significant bit), followed by the associated check digit; block one consists of h 16 to h 31 ; followed by the associated check digit etc. That is if h 0 is '1'B and h 1 to h 15 are all '0'B, then the sixteen bits have the value '8000'H or '32678' decimal, and the check digit is '5' decimal (see below for the check digit calculation method).

The check digit is calculated using the same mechanism as used for credit card numbers, that is, the LUHN formula (mod 10) as described below.

The following steps are required to validate a 6 digit group:

Step 1: Double the value of alternate digits of the number beginning with the second digit from the right (the first right --hand digit is the check digit.)

Step 2: Add the individual digits comprising the products obtained in Step 1 to each of t he unaffected digits in the original number.

Step 3: The total obtained in Step 2 must be a number ending in zero (30, 40, 50, etc.) for the number to be validated.

Example 1: to validate the group 398719, corresponding to '9BBF'H as the sixteen bits of hash:

Step 1:

```
3 9 8 7 1 9 x2  x2  x2 ------------6  16   2
```

```
Step 2:  (6) + 9 +(1+6) + 7 + (2) + 9
```

Step 3: Sum is 40 = 0 (mod 10): group is validated

Example 2: to validate the group 326785, corresponding to '8000'H as the sixteen bits of hash:

Step 1:

```
3 2 6 7 8 5 x2  x2  x2 ------------6  12  16
```

```
Step 2:  (6) + 2 +(1+2) + 7 + (1+6) + 5
```

Step 3: Sum is 30 = 0 (mod 10): group is validated

## 7.1.4 Signature Verification Method

With this method the trusted CA information is presented in a signed format as follows:

```
struct {
```

```
uint8 version; CertDisplayName displayName; Certificate trustedCACert; opaque cainfo_url <0..2^8-1>; Certificate signerCert; SignatureAlgorithm sig_alg; } TBSTrustedCAInfo struct { TBSTrustedCAInfo tc_info; Signature signature; } SignedTrustedCAInfo
```

| Item          | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Version       | The version of this data structure. For this specification it MUST be 1.                                                                                                                                                                     |
| DisplayName   | A name for the CA, suitable for display on the WAP client device.                                                                                                                                                                            |
| TrustedCACert | The CA Certificate. WAP clients MUST support the WTLSCertificate format and MAY support the X.509 format. If using X.509 format, this MUST meet the profile specified in [CERTPROF].                                                         |
| cainfo_url    | A URL, which MUST be supplied, which specifies where the client can get further information about the CA. This URL MUST be accessible from a WAP client. The intention here is to enable the PKI portal to give pointers to the CA's CPS etc |
| signerCert    | The public key certificate of the signer.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| sig_alg       | The signing algorithm. This MUST be one of the algorithms specified in [WTLS].                                                                                                                                                               |
| Signature     | The signature value                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

The encoding of this is to be the value of an application/vnd.wap.signed-certificate MIME type.

The client MUST be able to trust the signer of this structure before the contained certificate is used. The client MUST verify both the outer and inner signatures (the inner being on the self-certified structure, the outer signature being the signature on the TBSTrustedCAInfo).

The client MUST verify the signerCert. The signer may be a CA or an end entity. If the signer is a CA independent of the "new" CA, then there MAY be implications for the certification practices and certification policies of the two CAs (e.g. they might have to be "commensurate" for some definition of commensurate). If the signer is not a CA, then the device MUST ensure that the signer is certified by a currently trusted CA.

Devices MUST provide a mechanism through which some CAs can be marked as trusted for this particular purpose and MUST enforce this privilege when using this mechanism. This means that not all trusted CAs can "introduce" new CAs. Devices SHOULD also provide a mechanism to control whether a CA installed via this mechanism is allowed to "introduce" new CAs. Later versions of this specification MAY include standardized schemes for managing this, and other, PKI related privileges, however this is out of scope for this version.

Note that this means that the first installed CA has the opportunity to fairly easily introduce new CAs, and that users are reasonably likely not to understand the significance of accepting a new CA using this mechanism. For this reason, one configuration which has been examined, is where the "operator" provisions its own CA on the device and thereafter limits the ability of other entities to download new CA information. Mechanisms for enforcing this are out of scope of this specification.

## 7.1.5 Trusted CA Key Roll-over

When it is deemed necessary to update a root certificate, a root level CA operator generates a new root keypair and a self-signed root certificate.  The old root private key is used to sign a message of the form described in section 7.1.4 containing the new root certificate.  A CA operator SHOULD store copies of these update messages to distribute to clients who have missed a rollover.  Multiple messages of this form may be chained together and distributed in order to update clients who are more than one root certificate away from the current root certificate.  A client MAY indicate to the CA operator which root certificate they currently have by sending a hash for the root certificate.  Using this information, the CA operator can determine what root certificate rollover information to send.

This mechanism can be used either to rollover a CA key or to extend the lifetime of trusted CA information already present on the device.

To validate a root certificate rollover message consisting of a sequence of structures from 7.1.4 from a CA operator, a client MUST validate each trusted CA information block sequentially.  To do this, for each trusted CA information block a client MUST:

1. Use the root public key that they currently have to verify the signature on the trusted CA information block.
2. Perform all the checks indicated in section 7.1.4 on the trusted CA information block.
3. Accept the root certificate rollover, replacing the current root CA certificate with the new root CA certificate. The user MAY be informed of this.

```
Struct { SignedTrustedCAInfo signed_trusted_CA_information <0..2^161>; }  RootCertificateRolloverBlock
```

This structure MUST be delivered to the device using the application/vnd.wap.rollover-certificate MIME type.

## 7.2 Server WTLSCertificate Handling

This section describes how WTLS server certificates (which use the WTLSCertificate format) are handled. First we describe a method to send a certification request to a CA and then we describe a method for retrieving short-lived WTLSCertificates.

The general model here is that the server sends a certification request to a CA. In response the CA may generate and return a long-lived WTLSCertificate or the CA may instead issue a sequence of short-lived WTLSCertificates which can be retrieved by the WTLS server.

## 7.2.1 Server WTLSCertificate Issuing

Certificate Requests for WTLS Server Certificates SHOULD be PKCS #10 format as specified in [RFC2314].  This value should be [RFC1521] (base64) encoded and demarcated in a human friendly manner as follows:

```
-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE REQUEST-----
```

&lt;RFC2314 blob here&gt; -----END CERTIFICATE REQUEST-----

This value is typically entered into a web form offered by the CA, or included in an email sent to the CA.

Not all the contents of the request will necessarily appear in the issued WTLS server certificate as CA policies and real world character set constraints must be considered.  Further a CA MAY modify values for accuracy or presentation purposes.  Where the PKCS#10 format is used, the naming profile for WTLSCertificates (specified in [WTLS]) SHOULD be used when building the request DN as some or all of the subject name may be presented to the user.

The CA may then return a certificate as an RFC1113 encoded WTLSCertificate demarcated in a human friendly manner as follows:

-----BEGIN WTLS CERTIFICATE----&lt;RFC1113 encoded WTLSCertificate blob here&gt; -----END WTLS CERTIFICATE-----

WTLS servers SHOULD support receipt of such a format (e.g. from a file, or cut &amp; paste into an administrative GUI).

Furthermore, a URL MAY be delivered for the short lived certificate retrieval (7.2.2). A secure channel (e.g., SSL) SHOULD be used when the short lived certificate is retrieved. This specification does not define a mechanism for automating delivery of this URL to the WTLS server.

## 7.2.2 Retrieval of short-lived WTLSCertificates

Server authentication in the wireless environments differs substantially from that in the wired environments because of performance, bandwidth, roundtrips and code-footprint considerations. One of the issues in the wireless environments is checking for revocation. Traditional means such as downloading CRLs are not feasible and means such as OCSP add roundtrips, validation steps and additional trust points on the client. To overcome these issues, we introduce the concept of short-lived server WTLS certificates that convey both authenticity of the server and obviate the need for a separate revocation check.

WAP applications require a server certificate revocation capability, to ensure that, in the event a server is compromised or decommissioned, users cannot unwittingly continue to execute what appear to be valid, secured transactions with a rogue server.  Wireless devices typically do not have the local resources nor the communication bandwidth to implement revocation methods used in the wired world such as certificate revocation lists (CRLs) or the online certificate status protocol (OCSP).

To satisfy revocation requirements, WTLS servers MAY implement the short-lived certificate model, as the means of satisfying revocation requirements.  With this  approach, a server or gateway is authenticated once in a long-term credentials period - typically one year - with the expectation that the one server/gateway key pair will be used throughout that period.  However, instead of issuing a one-yearvalidity certificate, the certification authority issues a new short-lived certificate for the public key, with a lifetime of, say, 48 hours, every day throughout that year.  The server or gateway picks up its short-lived certificate daily and uses that certificate for client sessions established that day.  If the certification authority wishes to revoke the server or gateway (e.g., due to compromise of its private key), it simply ceases issuing further short-lived certificates.  Clients (in this case, WTLS servers) will no longer be presented with a currently valid certificate, hence will cease to consider the server authenticated.

Note that there must be an overlap period in which both a new short-lived certificate and the preceding short-lived certificate are both valid.  Note also that the method requires that a wireless device have a sufficiently accurate clock and, ideally, knowledge of the time zone since certificate validities are normally

expressed relative to UTC time.  To avert usability problems relating to  such timing requirements, it MAY be appropriate to employ a certificate overlap time of at least 24 hours. In particular, where short lived WTLSCertificates for servers last longer than a day then an overlap of at least 24 hours SHOULD be used.

Implementers should take note that use of  short-lived WTLS certificates MAY expose the WTLS server to new denial-of-service attacks (e.g. if the attacker tries to flood the responder). Where possible, implementers SHOULD take care that they include measures to det ect and recover from such attacks.

## 7.2.3 Request/Response Protocol

The request for a short-lived certificate is a simple HTTP GET for the URL which was supplied by the CA.

The response is a MIME formatted response.  For a returned X.509 certificate this is:

```
Content-Type: application/x-x509-user-cert <binary x.509 blob here>
```

For a returned WTLS certificate, the type is:

```
Content-Type: application/vnd.wap.wtls -user-cert <binary wtls server cert blob here>
```

Note: This certificate is a "user" certificate in the sense that it is not a CA certificate; in this case, the certificate is for a WTLS server.

In the event of an error, the response is:

```
Content-Type: text/plain <error text>
```

The error text is intended for human consumption. Implementers SHOULD treat all responses which do not contain "good" WTLS certificates as errors.

WTLS servers using this protocol:

- MUST support the use of a "https" URL, (in order to be able to avoid the simple denial-of-service attack resulting from insertion of a text/plain error message - note: this constraint does not say that they "MUST use https", just that it be possible to do so)
- MUST support receipt, and handling, of an application/vnd.wap.wtls -user-cert response content type
- MAY support receipt of an application/x-x509-user-cert response content type, and,
- MUST support receipt and handling of the text/plain response content type, indicating an error.

## 7.3 Client Registration

Where clients are required, or wish, to register OTA with a PKI, they contact a PKI portal, which (logically) acts as a registration authority. Different mechanisms are required to handle the certification of authentication and signature keys.

The client will typically "find" the PKI portal either via manual browsing or through a URL contained within a WML page. In the latter case, different URLs can be used to select between different PKI registration options, e.g. the certificates resulting from registration starting at "pkip.org.com/pkip/banking" and "pkip.org.com/pkip/stock-trades" may reflect sep arate certification and certificate policies.

The basic model is that the client connects to the PKI portal and then uses the relevant private key (via WTLS or signText) so that proof-of-possession can be verified using the corresponding public key. The

client MAY then supply further information, or the PKI portal MAY derive further information from other sources. The PKI portal MAY then re-format the public key and other information into a certificate request to be sent to a CA. This request MAY use CMP or CMC formatting as appropriate.

In order to be able to provide this proof-of-possession the client MUST be able to produce a form of the relevant public key which conforms to the WTLS and signText specifications. This MAY be self-signed or signed by a third party or may even contain a zero length signature. A Client MAY generate such a selfsigned format itself.

Implementers should note that, depending on policy, it may be advisable for the PKI portal not to indicate a list of trusted CAs (e.g. in a WTLS handshake) so that the client can use whatever form of  public key it chooses. If a PKI portal did indicate some set of CAs, then a client which wasn't previously certified by any of them could drop the connection.

PKI portals MUST be able to accept any relevant format (specified in WTLS or SignText) which includes the public key. PKI portals MAY use any additional information provided (e.g. a subject name, or the fact that the key being registered has already being certified by some party) in their further processing.. This allows clients with a variety of initial configurations to register with a PKI portal, for example a client may already have a public key certificate or may simply send the public key.

One model that has been considered is where a "device X.509 certificate" is provisioned, which doesn't reflect a user identity, but which is certified by e.g. an operator. In such an environment, a PKI portal that trusts the operator might sensibly choose to validate the device X.509 certificate (and e. g. check that it hasn't been revoked and the corresponding key is stored within a certain device like WIM), as part of its POP validation process.

Note that in the above case the PKI portal only need verify proof-of-possession which differs from the normal case of class III WTLS authentication or SignText verification. Normally a WTLS or SignText verification implementation will verify the certificate of the client in order to provide authentication. In order to avoid potential configuration or security problems with mixing authentication and proof-ofpossession in the same deployment it is RECOMMENDED that PKI portals be deployed on "special" WAP gateways, which are accessed using the end-to-end security mechanisms specified in [E2E]. This configuration means that it is not necessary to mix "proof-of-possession" mode and "authentication" mode in the same gateway, which diminishes the likelihood of mis -configuration resulting in security breaches.

The PKI portal MAY then respond to the client in a standard fashion using the response types defeined below. The response MAY include a certificate and/or certificate URL resulting from the exchange or an indication that the client SHOULD return later to retrieve this information.

Of course, the PKI portal MAY be  a combined CA and RA (really just a CA) in which case there will be no need to use PKI messaging in order to create certificates.

WAE is used to transfer necessary naming information and passwords. Content of the naming information is up to the authority, but would typically contain information specified in e.g. [RFC2511].

Passwords are also up to the authority. They would typically contain account numbers, personal id numbers etc., either permanent or one-time data.  This information is used to authenticate the user to 'bootstrap' certification.  WTLS encryption is used to protect the passwords adequately.

## 7.3.1 Certifying Authentication Keys

WTLS is used:

- to transfer the public key to be certified
- for Proof of Possession (POP) of the private key

- for authentication of the registration service (WTLS server authentication).

The public key is transferred in an existing certificate. Note that a WIM contains ready key pairs and associated certificates. It may be adequate for the RA to know that the original certificate has been issued by a known party (WIM card vendor, operator, bank etc), which indicates certain policies concerning the protection of the private key, associated PINs etc.

POP in this case is validated by the PKI portal (validation is based on successful WTLS handshake).

## 7.3.2 Certifying Signing Keys

The communication between User and PKI portal is based on WSP. Information that the PKI portal requires is passed to the client as WAE content. At least part of the information (possibly containing a challenge from the PKI portal) is signed, by the client, using the SignText() function, for POP of the private key. An original signing certificate (or self-signed certificate) may be passed in signedContent. Note that SignText() implicitly includes a timestamp.

For some applications, a signing certificate may not be required.

## 7.3.3 Certifying Two Keys

If both authentication and signing certificates are required, it may be useful to combine both requests, so that the user would have to enter minimal data. In this case the client and PKI portal MAY interact multiple times.

## 7.3.4 Sample Certification Request Information

In order to improve consistency across different PKIs the following piece of WMLScript illustrates gathering registration information from clients.  There is no assumption that the PKI portal will honor this information, e.g. the portal MAY replace naming or other information (except the public key).

The public key to be certified is transferred to the portal using either WTLS (as described in Section 7.3.1) or SignText (as described in Section 7.3.2).  This sample script allows users to request certification of either authentication or signing keys.  In either situation, the session SHOULD be protected by WTLS.

This script prompts the user for the name to appear in the certificate, a unique identifier provided by the CA, a password to authenticate the user to the CA and the type of certificate requested.  This information is then concatenated with fields separated by a colon (:).  If certification of a signing key is requested, a random challenge (nonce) provided by the portal is included and the string is signed to provide proof-ofpossession.

```
extern function ProduceRequest()  { var bbnull = " "; Dialogs.alert("Certificate Registration"); Dialogs.alert("Please leave fields blank if you do not have the requested values."); var Name = Dialogs.prompt("Name:", bbnull); var ID = Dialogs.prompt("Unique ID:", bbnull); var Password = Dialogs.prompt("Password:", bbnull); var Type = Dialogs.confirm("Which type of certificate are you requesting?", "Authentication", "Signing"); var Request; if (Type)
```

```
Request = Name + ID + Password; else { var nonce = "XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX"; /* PKI Portal should replace above value with a random value that is unique for each transaction.  */ // Comment this out if you don't have a Crypto implementation Request = Crypto.signText(nonce + ":" + Name + ":" + ID + ":" + Password, 5, 0); // Request = nonce + ":" + Name + ":" + ID + ":" + Password, 5, 0; } return Request; }
```

## 7.3.5 Delivery of Certificates

In some cases it is sufficient that the CA only publish the certificate (in an LDAP directory or other repository) or stores it in a database, and therefore the certificate does not need to be delivered to the handset. So, it is sufficient to acknowledge the user (using WAE application) that the certificate has been successfully issued and published. In this case there is no information about the certificate in the handset, just the original key id, which can be used in WTLS and in applications using signatures (SignText()).

If the certificate has to be delivered, this can be done using WAE with  the WSP content type application/x-x509-user-cert (WSP assigned number 0x1B).

Another scenario is to deliver only a certificate 'pointer'. An example of such is a certificate URL, used in PKCS#15 and WIM specifications. Finally, certification can require significant elapsed time. The WAE application should be contracted to handle this. E.g. the user is informed that certification is initiated, but actual certificate delivery would take place later. In either of these cases the WSP content type application/vnd.wap.cert-response MAY be returned or an application specific response MAY be returned.

Note: If the client passes a certificate URL rather than the certificate itself, it is requesting the server to do work (i.e. retrieve the certificate indicated in the certificate URL) prior to the client authenticating itself. A potential denial of service attack exists where a client deliberately passes an invalid certificate URL. Servers may protect themselves against such attacks by various means, e.g. by only "following" URLs which match some configured criteria.

The content corresponding to application/vnd.wap.cert-response contains the structure defined below:

```
enum { cert_info (0), cert(1), referral(2), (255) } CertRespType; struct { unit8 version; CertRespType type; select (type) { case cert_info: CertDisplayName display_name; Identifier ca_domain; Identifier subject; opaque url<0..255>; case cert: CertDisplayName display_name;
```

| Identifier Identifier X509Certificate case referral: opaque uint32   | ca_domain; subject; cert; url<0..255>; seconds_to_wait;   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|

| Item      | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|-----------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| version   | The version of this data structure. For this specification it MUST be 1.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| cert_info | These fields contain the details of a certificate which has been issued for the client. display_name: (max 32 chars, so it can fit in a PKCS#15 label) SHOULD be a human readable name which indicates the services for which the certificate is useful. This field MUST NOT be empty. The character set used here SHOULD be UTF8 (in order to be stored in WIM, it MUST be UTF8). ca_domain: MUSTcontain the hash of the CA's public key - this MAY be omitted if the cert field is present and the certificate contains an authorityKeyId extension and the client is able to extract this field from the certificate. If omitted IdentifierType.null MUST be used to indicate the absence of the ca_domain. Note that the ca_domain field might, in some cases, not match the AKID from the client certificate, if e.g. the issuing CA is a subbordinate CA within a hierarchy and the WTLS servers use the root of the hierarchy as the ca_domain. subject: MUST contain the hash of the certified subject public key. url: this field, which SHOULD be used contains a URL usable to retrieve the relevant certificate. Section 7.4 specifies the URL scheme. The client SHOULD store this URL along with the ca_domain and use these as required in WTLS or SignText. Note that this field is expected to be present as in most cases we wish to avoid sending client certificates to clients. |
| cert      | display_name: as above ca_domain: as above subject: as above cert: this field contains the client's certificates. Note that, where possible, implementers are encouraged to use the cert_info option in preference to this one. When used, this option normally contains a single X.509 certificate. The client SHOULD store the certificate along with the associated private key. If possible, the client SHOULD verify that the key in the certificate matches its private key. The client MAY check back at the URL specified (by url) after a delay (specified by                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| referral  | seconds_to_wait). A PKI portal, which returns a referral, MUST ensure that clients who do check back again receive a response of the same type (i.e. application/vnd.wap.cert-response). Clients MAY use this method to automate retrieval of certificates or certificate URLs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

## 7.4 Client Certificate URLs

Rather than pass client certificates over-the-air, the approach taken is to prefer to pass certificate URLs over-the-air, which allow the related client certificate to be retrieved by relying parties.

The certificate URL has been used in the PKCS#15 and WIM specifications. It is defined as a standard URL. Functionally it can be anything that enables getting a single  certificate path in response to a request to that URL. Possible protocols that could use this include HTTP, LDAP and FTP.

In the WAP PKI the client MAY have multiple certificates for the same key pair, for example if it has registered the same key with more than one PKI. This imposes a way for clients to distinguish the certificate which the relying party should use to verify a client signature (whether for authentication or for signing). We use the certificate URL, which can be stored in the WIM as the mechanism for distinguishing certificates.

The certificate URL SHOULD be used as follows: The client sends the certificate URL to a server which then uses that to get the certificate. The server uses the certificate but never sends that to the handset. This method clearly saves bandwidth. One problem in this approach may be that the server (that would need the user certificate) may not have access rights to a repository containing this certificate (if that is in a private directory).

The party (e.g. WTLS server or signature verification utility) that retrieves the certificate using a URL, MUST check that the certificate content matches with the information indicated in the URL (like issuer and serial number).

There are two URL schemes defined: LDAP URLs and HTTP URLs. As devices do not need to parse the URLs, the use of the schemes only impacts the PKI portals and servers.

## 7.4.1 HTTP Scheme

The format of the HTTP based certificate URL SHOULD be as follows:

```
http://<base URL>?in=<issuer name>&sn=<serial number>[other URL parameters]
```

where

&lt;base URL&gt; identifies a server/program;

&lt;issuer name&gt; identifies the certificate issuer.  It is a Base64 encoding of the DER encoded Issuer field in the X.509 certificate.

&lt;serial number&gt; identifies the serial number of the certificate. It is a Base64 encoding of the DER encoded serialNumber field in the X.509 certificate.

[other URL parameters] are additional, optional, URL parameters.

RFC 1521 [RFC 1521] requires that a Base64 encoding be represented in lines of no more than 76 characters each.  In order to prevent URL encoding problems however, the Base64 encoding of the fields above must not include line feeds and thus must contain only one line. Note that when Base64 padding characters ('=') are used, they must be encoded into the URL format as '%3D'.

Example values from a certificate:

Issuer name:

```
C=US, O=Wap HTTP Searches Inc.
```

DER encoding of issuer name:

0x302E310B3009060355040613025553311F301D060355040 (cont'd)

A1316576170204854545020536561726368657320496E632E

Base64 encoding of DER encoded issuer name:

MC4xCzAJBgNVBAYTAlVTMR8wHQYDVQQKExZXYXAgSFRUUCBTZWFyY2hlcyBJbmMu

Certificate serial number:

2

DER encoding of certificate serial number:

0x020102

Base64 encoding of DER encoding of certificate serial number:

AgEC

A URL for the certificate might be (line break for readability):

```
http://www.example.org/cert?in=MC4xCzAJBgNVBAYTA lVTMR8wHQYDVQQKExZXYXAgSFRUUCBTZWFyY2hlcyBJbmMu&sn=AgEC
```

The URL MUST be sent to the identified server using a HTTP GET message. The response is a MIME formatted response. For a returned X.509 certificate this is:

```
Content-Type: application/x-x509-user-cert <binary X.509 blob>
```

## 7.4.2 LDAP Scheme

The format of the LDAP based certificate URL SHOULD be as specified in [LDAPURL] and [LDAPSRCH]. The matching rule shall be 'certificateExactMatch', matching on issuer name and certificate serial number.

Example:

```
ldap://ldap.wap/cn=Wap%20User,o=Wap%20LDAP%20Searches%20Inc.,c=US ?userCertificate??(userCertificate:2.5.13.34:=123456$o=Wap%20LDAP %20Searches%20Inc.,c=US)
```

Note - line break is for display purposes only, and is not present in the actual URL.

Note - Many LDAP servers do not support the 'certificateExactMatch' matching rule. Thus, LDAP clients may need to reformat the LDAP URL to remove the matching rule before making the request. All of the values in the userCertificate attribute will then be returned to the LDAP client, which will then have to process the matching rules itself.

The response is an LDAP formatted response.

## 8  WPKI Static Conformance Requirement

This static conformance requirement lists a minimum set of functions that can be implemented to help ensure that WAP implementations using WPKI will be able to inter-operate.  The 'Status' column indicates if the function is mandatory (M) or optional (O). Where a reference to an entire section of the specification is given without further qualification then implementations MUST support all "MUST" and statements in the section, and MAY support all "SHOULD" and "MAY" statements.

Where no sub-function is given a later subsection of this section contains details or the "Status" column applies to relevant parts of the entire section (where the relevant parts are clear from the context).

This section in its entirety only applies to WAP implementation that claim conformance to "the WAP PKI". Parts of this section do apply to all WAP implementations that implement either signText() or WTLS classes 2 or 3.

## 8.1 Client Options

| Item            | Function                 | Subfunction   | Reference   | Status   | Requirement   |
|-----------------|--------------------------|---------------|-------------|----------|---------------|
| WPKI-Client-001 | Public key capabilities  |               | 8.1.1       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Client-002 | Private key capabilities |               | 8.1.2       | O        |               |

## 8.1.1 Client Public Key Capability Options

This chapter presents client options related to public key operations used for verification purposes (that is, WTLS server authentication). This chapter is related to all WPKI-capable clients.

| Item            | Function                                                                            | Subfunction                          | Reference   | Status   | Requirement   |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-------------|----------|---------------|
| WPKI-Client-003 | Local trusted CA information handling                                               |                                      | 7.1.1       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Client-004 | OTA Trusted CA information download                                                 | Hashed CA information                | 7.1.3       | M        | WSP:MCF       |
| WPKI-Client-005 | OTA Trusted CA information download                                                 | OTA Signed CA information            | 7.1.4       | M        | WSP:MCF       |
| WPKI-Client-006 | Trusted CA key roll-over                                                            | rollover-certificate 1               | 7.1.5       | O        | WSP:MCF       |
| WPKI-Client-007 | Public key algorithms for certificate signature validation: at least one supported. |                                      |             | M        |               |
| WPKI-Client-008 | Public key algorithms for certificate signature validation: at least one supported. | RSA                                  | [WAPWT LS]  | O        |               |
| WPKI-Client-009 | Public key algorithms for certificate signature validation: at least one supported. | ECC (curves as defined in [WAPWTLS]) | [WAPWT LS]  | O        |               |

## 8.1.2 Client Private Key Capability Options

This chapter is only related to clients that support private keys. The client may implement private key support using WIM or otherwise (including software only).

1 The justification for this is that the useful lifetime of a WAP device or server is expected to be significantly shorter than the typical validity of root CA information.

| Item            | Function                                                                                                                                 | Subfunction                          | Reference   | Status   | Requirement     |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-------------|----------|-----------------|
| WPKI-Client-010 | Private key capability (note: this doesn't mean all clients have key pairs, just that they be capable of storing and using private keys) | Authentication key (class 3)         | 6.2         | M        | WTLS-C070       |
| WPKI-Client-011 | Private key capability (note: this doesn't mean all clients have key pairs, just that they be capable of storing and using private keys) | signText() key                       | 6.2         | M        | WMLSCrypt- C001 |
| WPKI-Client-012 | OTA WTLS client authentication (here used for registration)                                                                              |                                      | 7.3.1       | M        | WTLS-C070       |
| WPKI-Client-013 | WMLScript signText (here used for registration;)                                                                                         |                                      | 7.3.2       | M        | WMLSCrypt- C001 |
| WPKI-Client-014 | Certificate delivery                                                                                                                     | handling of cert- response           | 7.3.5       | M        | WSP:MCF         |
| WPKI-Client-015 | Certificate delivery                                                                                                                     | x509-user-cert                       | 7.3.5       | O        | WSP:MCF         |
| WPKI-Client-016 | Private key algorithms for signing: at least one supported                                                                               |                                      |             | M        |                 |
| WPKI-Client-017 | Private key algorithms for signing: at least one supported                                                                               | RSA                                  | [WAPWT LS]  | O        |                 |
| WPKI-Client-018 | Private key algorithms for signing: at least one supported                                                                               | ECC (curves as defined in [WAPWTLS]) | [WAPWT LS]  | O        |                 |

## 8.1.3 Client root certificate storage options

This sections specifies the options for client access to root certificates.

| Item            | Function                    | Subfunction                                                                                                                                                   |   Reference | Status   | Requirement                            |
|-----------------|-----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|----------|----------------------------------------|
| WPKI-Client-019 | Accessing root certificates | The client shall be able to access certificates stored in a WIM on the same ICC as the SIM. This option applies to clients that support a SIM and a WIM only. |           6 | M        | WIM-015; WIM-016; WIMME-017; WIMME-018 |
| WPKI-Client-020 | Accessing root certificates | The client shall be able to access certificates stored in a WIM not on the same ICC as the SIM. This applies to clients that support a WIM only               |           6 | M        | WIM-015; WIM-016; WIMME-017; WIMME-018 |
| WPKI-Client-022 | Accessing root certificates | The client shall be able to access certificates stored on the client itself.                                                                                  |           6 | O        |                                        |

## 8.2 PKI Portal Options

This section specifies the options for PKI portal implementers.

| Item            | Function                    | Subfunction   | Reference   | Status   | Requirement   |
|-----------------|-----------------------------|---------------|-------------|----------|---------------|
| WPKI-Portal-001 | Public key capabilities     |               | 8.2.1       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Portal-002 | Support Client private keys |               | 8.2.3       | O        |               |

## 8.2.1 PKI Portal Public Key Capability Options

| Item            | Function                                    | Subfunction          | Reference   | Status   | Requirement   |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------------|----------------------|-------------|----------|---------------|
| WPKI-Portal-003 | OTA Trusted CA certificate download support | hashed-certificate   | 7.1.3       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Portal-004 |                                             | signed root          | 7.1.4       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Portal-005 | Trusted CA key roll-over                    | rollover-certificate | 7.1.5       | O        |               |

## 8.2.2 PKI Portal Options to Support WTLS Server Certification

| Item            | Function                                                    | Subfunction                        | Reference   | Status   | Requirement   |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|-------------|----------|---------------|
| WPKI-Portal-006 | Handling of PKCS#10 long term server certification requests |                                    | 7.2.1       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Portal-007 | Responses to PKCS#10 requests                               |                                    | 7.2.1       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Portal-008 | Responses to PKCS#10 requests                               | Direct return of WTLSCertificate   | 7.2.1       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Portal-009 | Responses to PKCS#10 requests                               | Direct return of X.509 Certificate | 7.2.1       | O        |               |
| WPKI-Portal-010 | Responses to PKCS#10 requests                               | Return of URL                      | 7.2.1       | O        |               |
| WPKI-Portal-011 | Short-lived cert retrieval protocol                         |                                    | 7.2.3       | O        |               |

## 8.2.3 PKI Portal Options to Support Client Private Keys

| Item            | Function                                                | Subfunction    | Reference   | Status   | Requirement     |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------------------------|----------------|-------------|----------|-----------------|
| WPKI-Portal-012 | WTLS client authentication (here used for registration) |                | 7.3.1       | M        | WTLS-S070       |
| WPKI-Portal-013 | WMLScript signText support (here used for registration) |                | 7.3.2       | M        | WMLSCrypt- A001 |
| WPKI-Portal-014 | Certificate delivery                                    | cert-response  | 7.3.5       | M        |                 |
| WPKI-Portal-015 |                                                         | x509-user-cert | 7.3.5       | O        |                 |
| WPKI-Portal-016 | Support for certificate URL retrieval                   |                | 7.4         | M        |                 |
| WPKI-Portal-017 | Support for certificate URL retrieval                   | HTTP scheme    | 7.4.1       | M        |                 |
| WPKI-Portal-018 |                                                         | LDAP scheme    | 7.4.2       | O        |                 |

## 8.2.4 PKI Portal Options to interact with X.509 PKI

| Item   | Function   | Subfunction   | Reference   | Status   | Requirement   |
|--------|------------|---------------|-------------|----------|---------------|

| WPKI-Portal-019   | Support CMP between PKI portal and RA/CA   |   7.3 | O   |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------|-------|-----|
| WPKI-Portal-020   | Support CMC between PKI portal and RA/CA   |   7.3 | O   |

## 8.3 WTLS Server Options

This section describes PKI options related to WTLS servers.

| Item            | Function                               | Subfunction                        | Reference   | Status   | Requirement   |
|-----------------|----------------------------------------|------------------------------------|-------------|----------|---------------|
| WPKI-Server-001 | Local trusted CA information handling  |                                    | 7.1.2       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Server-002 | Production of PKCS#10 requests         |                                    | 7.2.1       | O        |               |
| WPKI-Server-003 | Handling responses to PKCS#10 requests | Direct return of WTLSCertificate   | 7.2.1       | O        |               |
| WPKI-Server-004 | Handling responses to PKCS#10 requests | Direct return of X.509 Certificate | 7.2.1       | O        |               |
| WPKI-Server-005 | Handling responses to PKCS#10 requests | Return of URL                      | 7.2.1       | O        |               |
| WPKI-Server-006 | Short-lived cert retrieval protocol    |                                    | 7.2.3       | O        |               |
| WPKI-Server-007 | Support for certificate URL retrieval  |                                    | 7.4         | M        |               |
| WPKI-Server-008 | Support for certificate URL retrieval  | HTTP scheme                        | 7.4.1       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Server-009 | Support for certificate URL retrieval  | LDAP scheme                        | 7.4.2       | O        |               |

## 8.4 signText() Verifier Options

| Item           | Function                              | Subfunction   | Reference   | Status   | Requirement   |
|----------------|---------------------------------------|---------------|-------------|----------|---------------|
| WPKI-Verif-001 | Local trusted CA information handling |               | 7.1.2       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Verif-002 | Support for certificate URL retrieval |               | 7.4         | M        |               |
| WPKI-Verif-003 | Support for certificate URL retrieval | HTTP scheme   | 7.4.1       | M        |               |
| WPKI-Verif-004 | Support for certificate URL retrieval | LDAP scheme   | 7.4.2       | O        |               |

## Appendix A  Requirements and Recommendations

This (informative) annex records the set of requirements and recommendations that were used as a starting point in developing the WAP PKI specification. It is included in order to provide readers with useful background and to indicate the direction(s) in which the WAP PKI may develop.

Note that the use of MUST/SHOULD here is non-normative, that is, there is no implication that conformance to any part of this section is required for conformance to the WAP PKI.

In this section, requirements and recommendations, which the WAP PKI needs to meet, are presented. Each section also contains some recommendations that the WAP PKI should be defined to meet.

Note that some of these requirements and recommendations are not technical requirements on WAP PKI protocols or data formats, but rather requirements on the deployed PKI (as a whole) with which the WAP entities are interacting. For example, the statements relating to legal significance (or otherwise) are not technical requirements, but can affect the implementat ion and operation of a WAP aware PKI

Headings are simply for convenience and bear no other significance.

## A.1 Trusted CA handling

1. Clients must be able to securely add new trusted CA certificates (or similar information), that was not previously trusted by the client, operator or manufacturer.
3. Clients must be able to delete trusted CA certificates (or similar information).
2. It must be possible to add new trusted CA certificates (or similar information) over-the-air.
4. It must be possible to use information distributed out-of-band to help secure the addition of trusted CA certificates (or similar information).
5. Where out-of-band information is used to secure the addition of trusted CA certificates, the out -ofband information may be supplied either before or after the trusted CA certificates (or similar information) have been added. The trusted CA certificates MUST not be used before the out-ofband information has been used.

Note: Out-of-band is harder than for the Internet case since the phone is pretty much always in-band. This should be borne in mind by implementers and those deploying WAP PKIs.

- Recommendations
1. It should be possible to leverage an operator, manufacturer, or other previously trusted CA certificates, to assist the client in assuring the validity of new trusted CA certificates (or similar information).
2. Deletion or addition of trusted CA certificates (or similar information) should provide for explicit user consent.
3. Clients should be able to view the set of currently trusted CA certificates.

## A.2 Registration

1. Clients must be able to register within PKIs over-the-air based on either pre-existing trusted -ca information or on trusted certificates (or similar information) that is added as part of the registration process or without having to install trusted certificates (or similar information) for the PKI into which they are registering.
2. It must be possible to use an existing registration to bootstrap a new registration.
3. In order to register their identity with a public key, clients must be able to prove possession of the related private key.

4. Clients must be able to de-register themselves from a PKI.
5. Clients must be able to register either their transport or application layer keys in new PKIs.
6. Clients that support key generation must be able to register newly generated keys in PKIs.
- Recommendations
1. Clients should not have to trust a PKI, into which they are registering, except insofar as they potentially accept liability by doing so.
2. It should be possible to use shared secrets, distributed out-of-band, to authenticate clients to the PKI during or after registration.
4. Clients should be able to (but need not) inform a PKI porta l when they de-register.
3. It should be possible to use a shared secret, distributed out-of-band, to authenticate the PKI to clients during or after registration.
5. Clients should be able to view their current set of registrations.

## A.3 Assurance levels

- Recommendations
1. In order to meet service provider's authentication requirements, the WAP PKI should provide for a range of assurance levels.
2. PKI management operations should be suitable for a range of assurance levels, though the details of the PKI messages do not, themselves, determine a level of assurance.

## A.4 Legal signatures

1. It must not be the case that all registrations are such that the client's signatures have legal significance.
2. The user must be made aware if registration in a PKI exposes her to any potential liability due to the fact that signatures verified with the new certificate may be legally significant.
- Recommendations
1. It should be possible to register a client in a PKI so that the client's signatures can have legal significance.

## A.5 General

1. In addition to PKI portal operation by service provider themselves, it must be possible for PKI portal operation by third parties, trusted by the service providers for the PKI operations required.
2. It must be possible to use an end-to-end WTLS connection from clients to PKI portals. This doesn't mean that all PKI operations must use this, just that it be possible.
4. It must be possible to use client-authenticated e2e WTLS connections between clients and PKI portals (in cases where clients have a previous registration usable by the PKI portal).
3. It must be possible to use server-authenticated e2e WTLS connections between clients and PKI portals.
5. It must be possible for PKI portals to produce standard PKI (e.g. CMC/CMP) certification requests, e.g. [RFC2510] where the portal acts as an RA.
6. Where cross-certificates exist and are usable, then it must be possible to use them (without clients necessarily having to know of their existence).

- Recommendations
1. The amount of user input from clients should be minimized.
2. Clients should only have to store (or re-enter) minimal persistent information about each PKI; any such persistent information must be usable to identify client certificates to the relying party.

## A.6 Privacy

1. Operators must not have to be a part of the registration process.
2. It must be possible for PKI portals to keep operators unaware of client registrations
- Recommendations
1. A client should have overall control over privacy, but may contract with an operator, that the operator is allowed to be involved and, (optionally, given such a contract), that the operator may, (under the client's direction), provide client information to the PKI portal, in order to reduce the client's need to enter data
2. Client's identities (in the various PKIs) should not be easily correlated in order to protect against activity tracking

## A.7 Security

1. Registration protocols must protect against replay-attacks.
2. Registration protocols must allow for generation of new key pairs in clients.
3. Clients must be able to check the validity of server and CA certificates.

## A.8 Performance/Quality-of-Service

- Recommendations
1. Roundtrips should be minimized which may mean that registration options are constrained depending on the bearer.

24-Apr-2001 Page 41(46)

## Appendix B  MIME types

This (non-normative) annex provides a cross reference to the parts of this specification where MIME types are used, and where appropriate, provides the relevant WSP assigned number for each MIME type.

| MIME Type                                 | Content 2                               | WSP assigned number   | Reference                  |
|-------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------|----------------------------|
| application/x-x509-user-cert              | X.509: Certificate                      | 0x1B                  | 7.2.3, 7.3.5, 7.4.1, 7.4.2 |
| application/vnd.wap.wtls -user- cert      | WTLSCertificate                         | 0x19                  | 7.2.3                      |
| application/vnd.wap.hashed- certificate   | HashedTrustedCAInfo                     | TBA 3                 | 7.1.3                      |
| application/vnd.wap.signed- certificate   | SignedTrustedCAInfo                     | TBA                   | 7.1.4                      |
| application/vnd.wap.rollover- certificate | RootCertificateRollover Block           | TBA                   | 7.1.5                      |
| application/vnd.wap.cert- response        | CertResponse                            | TBA                   | 7.3.5                      |
| text/plain                                | Unstructured error string in ASCII text | N/A                   | 7.2.3                      |

## Appendix C  Device Certificate

This informative annex describes a practice that may be used in certificate registration.

## C.1  Definition of Device Certificate

A device that has a private key capability (like WIM) may be supplied to the user with initial certificates which are not personalized for the user. In that case, the user needs to obtain a certificate which binds the public key with a user identity, relevant to a Registration Authority (RA).

The RA, in order to accept a public key, may need to be aware that the corresponding private key is contained in a secure device and handled in a secure way in all circumstances. This may be required due to business related security reasons, or due to legislation regarding digital signatures.

Security of a private -public key pair includes

- it is a good quality key pair (randomness, algorithm specific checking done e.g. for RSA)
- no copies of the private key is left outside the device if the key pair was generated outside the device (this applies at least for keys used for digital signatures)
- it unfeasible to obtain the private key afterwards from the device
- PINs protecting usage of the private key, are well managed

Security of the key pair needs to be guaranteed by the manufacturer (or issuer) of the device (e.g. WIM card). If registration is done physically (i.e., the registration officer and the user meet physically, and the officer is able to see the device), it may be possible verify the authenticity of the device visually. This may not be sufficient. Also, it is not possible if the registration key takes place without a physical contact, i.e., using a remote connection.

To make it possible to securely authenticate a manufacturer of device containing the private key, a device certificate may be used. The device manufacturer, when generating a key pair, creates a certificate for the key pair.

The meaning of a device certificate is that the device manufacturer guarantees the quality of the key, the device storing the key and the related procedures. The device manufacturer may formulate a related practice statement. Security evaluation or audit procedures may be used.

Examples of issuers of device certificates are

- Operators issuing SIM-WIM cards. In this case, the issuer may indicate the actual card manufacturer.
- Smart card manufacturers

The main purpose of a device certificate is to assist registration procedure. However, in some case a certificate can be used for actual identification purposes (for some services), and for registration purposes (for other services).

It may or may not be adequate for an issuer of device certificates to run a certificate revocation service.

## C.1.1 Content of a Device Certificate

A device certificate should comply to [CERTPROF]. The following tables describe an example of the actual contents.

| Field                     | Content                                                                                                                        |
|---------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Certificate serial number | Up to the manufacturer. Eg, part or the device serial number (like ICC ID) combined with a key number.                         |
| Issuer                    | Manufacturer identification. May include model etc. information. May indicate the device issuer and the original manufacturer. |
| Valid not before          | Date of creating/storing the key and certificate.                                                                              |
| Valid not after           | End of expected maximum lifetime of the device.                                                                                |
| Subject                   | E.g. the device serial number (like ICC ID) in the subject serialNumber attribute.                                             |
| Public key                | Public key associated with the private key in the device.                                                                      |
| Key usage extension       | Indicates operation that the device supports with this key.                                                                    |

| Key Usage        | Supported Operation                                                                                                  |
|------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| nonRepudiation   | Digital signature with user confirmation. The device requires user verification (PIN) for every signature operation. |
| digitalSignature | Digital signature used for authentication (eg, for WTLS RSA handshake).                                              |
| keyAgreement     | Used in WTLS ECDH handshake.                                                                                         |
| keyEncipherment  | Used for unwrapping a key.                                                                                           |

## C.2  Verification of a Device Certificate

The Registration authority should be able to verify the device certificate. In order to do that, the RA should have access to the manufacturer CA certificate (containing the manufacturer public key). Based on that, the RA may verify the device certificate, and thus become convinced that the key that is being registered has proper security.

In practice, the manufacturer may have a single CA certificate to certify all keys, or it may have a top CA for certification of intermediate CAs that certify actual keys. The manufacturer (top) CA may have been certified by a 3 rd party CA, which makes it easier to securely distribute the manufacturer (top) CA certificates of different manufacturers.

Manufacturer certificates are sent to a Registration Authority in a certificate registration process using normal methods like WTLS handshake or signText. Here, the RA may indicate which authorities (signing device certificates) it accepts.

## C.3  Creation of a Manufacturer Certificate

There are different cases to create key pairs, and the associated methods to create device certificates.

## C.3.1 Case 1: Key Generation Outside of the Device

In this case, the key pair is generated outside the device and then saved in the device. In this case the generation procedure and saving needs to be highly secure. The advantage in this method is that the device need not support key generation, which may be demanding for a low-end device while maintaining good quality of the key. The disadvantage is that the generation procedure must be highly secure which may be administratively difficult to achieve.

The procedure of creating the key pair and device certificate is

1. create the key pair
2. save the private key in the device
4. create the device certificate data for the public key
3. erase all copies of the private key outside of the device
5. sign it with the manufacturer key
6. save the device certificate (or certificate URL) in the device

## C.3.2 Case 2: Key Generation in the Device during Manufacturing

In this case, the key pair is generated inside the device as a part of the manufacturing process.

The procedure of creating the key pair and device certificate is in this case

1. instruct the device to create the key pair
3. create the device certificate data
2. retrieve the public key
4. sign it with the manufacturer key
5. save the device certificate (or certiifcate URL) in the device

## C.3.3 Case 3: Key Generation by the User

In this case, the key pair is generated inside the device after the manufacturing process, when the module is already in the possession of the user. In this case, the device has an initial management key pair (individual key per device) that has been issued a device certificate (created as described in the case 1 or 2). This key can only be used internally by the device to certify newly generated keys (i.e., the device does not allow this key to be used for ordinary purposes).

The procedure of creating a new key pair and device certificate for that key is in this case:

1. instruct the device to  create the key pair

2. instruct the device to create a certificate using the management key for signing that, and save the certificate as a device certificate

In this case the new device certificate must be accompanied with the device certificate of the management key, for verification.

Note that this case is not supported in the current WIM specification.

## Appendix D  Change History (Informative)

| Type of Change   | Date        | Section              | Description                               |
|------------------|-------------|----------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Class 0          | 03-Mar-2000 |                      | The initial version of this document.     |
| Class 2          | 09-Aug-2000 | 7.3.5                | Delivery of certificates syntax           |
| Class 2          | 09-Aug-2000 | 7.3.5, 7.4.2         | Problem with return value for LDAP Scheme |
| Class 2          | 09-Aug-2000 | 6, 7.1               | Removing WTAIspecification fromWPKI       |
| Class 3          | 09-Aug-2000 | 6, 8.1.3             | Finding CA certificates                   |
| Class 3          | 09-Aug-2000 | 6, 8.1.3             | Fix to above CR                           |
| Class 3          | 09-Aug-2000 | 6.3, 7.3             | Architecture Consistency Review Rec#1     |
| Class 3          | 09-Aug-2000 | 3.2, 7.3, 8.2.4, A.5 | Architecture Consistency Review Rec#2     |
| Class 3          | 09-Aug-2000 | 7.1.4                | Clarify TrustedCACert in TBSTrustedCAInfo |
| Class 3          | 09-Aug-2000 | Annex C              | Manufacturer certificate                  |
| Class 3          | 26-Oct-2000 | 8                    | Clarify TrustedCACert in TBSTrustedCAInfo |
| Class 3          | 26-Oct-2000 | 6, 8.1.3             | Manufacturer certificate                  |
| Class 3          | 24-Apr-2001 | 7.4.1                | Clarification of HTTP Certificate URLs    |
