## WAP Certificate and CRL Profiles WAP-211-WAPCert

Approved 22-May-2001

## Wireless Application Protocol WAP Certificate and CRL Profiles Specification

## Disclaimer:

A  list  of  errata  and  updates  to  this  document  is available from the WAP  Forum™  Web  site, http://www.wapforum.org/, in the form of  SIN documents,  which  are  also  subject  to  revision  or removal without notice.

This document is subject to change without notice.

Y ou may use this document or any part of the document for internal or educational purposes only, provided  you  do  not  modify,  edit  or  take  out  of  context  the  information  in  this  document  in  any manner. You may not use this document in any other manner without the prior written permission of the  WAP  Forum™.  The  WAP  Forum™  authorizes  you  to  copy  this  document,  provided  that  you retain all  copyright  and other proprietary notices contained in the original materials on any copies of the  materials  and  that  you  comply  strictly  with  these  terms.  This  copyright  permission  does  not constitute an endorsement of the products or services offered by you.

The WAP Forum™ assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions in  this  document.  In  no  event shall the WAP Forum™ be liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever arising out of or in connection with the use of this  information.

WAP Forum TM members have agreed to use reasonable endeavors to disclose in a timely manner to the  WAP  Forum  the  existence  of  all  intellectual  property  rights  (IPR 's)  essential  to  the  present document.  The members do not have an obligation to conduct IPR searches.  This information is publicly available to members and non-members of the WAP Forum and may be found on the 'WAP IPR Declarations' list at http://www.wapforum.org/what/ipr.htm.  Essential IPR is available for license on the basis set out in the schedule to the WAP Forum Application Form.

Known problems associated with  this document are published at  http://www.wapforum.org/ .

Comments regarding this document can be submitted to the WAP Forum TM in the manner published at http://www.wapforum.org/.

## 1  Scope

Wireless  Application  Protocol  (WAP)  is  a  result  of  continuous  work  to  define  an  indu stry-wide  specification  for developing  applications  that  operate  over  wireless  communication  networks.  The  scope  for  the  WAP  Forum  is  to define a set of standards to be used by service applications. The wireless market is growing very quickly and reaching new  customers  and  services.  To  enable  operators  and  manufacturers  to  meet  the  challenges  in  advanced  services, differentiation and fast/flexible service creation, WAP defines a set of protocols in transport, session and application layers. For additional i nformation on the WAP architecture, refer to [17].

This document specifies WAP Certificate profiles. It is based on work done within IETF's PKIX working group [15]). This version of this document specifies profiles for user, server, and authority certificates only. It is anticipated that later versions will include specifications for other types of certificates as well. The term 'WAP server' used here is not  limited  to   WAP  gateways  but  may  include  third  party  servers  and  content/service  provider  servers  processing certificates conforming to this specification.

## 2  Document Status

This document is available online in the following formats:

- -PDF format at http://www.wapforum.org/ .

## 2.1 Document History

First proposed version:

WAP-211-WAPCert-20000309-p

## Incorporated SCDs:

| SCD                            | Title                                                                                                                                           |
|--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| WAP-211_100-WAPCert-20000705-p | ADDITION OF INFORMATION REGARDING RESERVED WTLS CERTIFICATE ATTRIBUTES                                                                          |
| WAP-211_101-WAPCert-20001221-p | ADDITION OF INFORMATION REGARDING RESERVED WTLS CERTIFICATE ATTRIBUTES MODIFICATION OF CLIENT ECC CAPABILITY REQUIREMENTS EDITORIAL CORRECTIONS |
| WAP-211_102-WAPCert-20010502-p | ADDITION OF X.509-BASED SERVER CERTIFICATEPROFILE                                                                                               |
| WAP-211_103-WAPCert-20010424-p | CHANGE OF CHAIN LENGTH PROCESSING REQUIREMENT                                                                                                   |

## Editorial changes:

| Section           | Change                                                                                                                                  |
|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| General           | Adapted to new document template , spelling corrections                                                                                 |
| 3.1               | Corrected URL for reference [16] Corrected reference [17] - [20] to be in alignment with WAP guidelines Updated reference [23] and [24] |
| 6.2.2, 6.4.3, 9.1 | Corrected ASN.1 value reference name (shall be ecdsa- with-SHA1 )                                                                       |
| C.1.2             | Cert-SrvA-C-05: Clarified sub-function statement (Reference [8] accompanies reference [7]). Added word 'Server' to section heading.     |
| C.2.1             | Cert-Gen-S-04: Clarified sub-function statement (Reference [8] accompanies reference [7]) Cert-Gen-S-14: Corrected Section reference    |

## 2.2 Errata

## 2.3 Comments

Comments regarding this document can be submitted to the WAP  Forum in the manner published at http://www.wapforum.org/ .

## 3  References

## 3.1 Normative references

The  following  specifications,  recommendations  and  international  standards  contain  provisions,  which,  through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this specification.

- [1]  American  National  Standard  X9.62,  ' Public  Key  Cryptography  For  The  Financial  Services  Industry: The Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm, ' Accredited Standards Committee X9F1, 1999.
- [2]  T.  Berners-Lee,  L.  Masinter,  M.  McCahill,  ' Uniform  Resource  Locators  (URL) ,'  IETF  RFC  1738, December 1994. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc1738.txt .
- [3]  S. Bradner, ' Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels ,' IETF RFC 2119, March 1997. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2119.txt .
- [4]  Dierks, T., C. Allen, ' The TLS Protocol Version 1.0 ,' IETF RFC2246,  January 1999.  URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc 2246.txt.
- [5]  ITU-T  Recommendation  X.500  (1997)  |  ISO/IEC  9594-1:1997,  ' Information  Technology  -  Open Systems Interconnection - The Directory: Overview of concepts, models and services .'
- [6]  ITU-T  Recommendation  X.501  (1997)  |  ISO/IEC  9594-2:1997 ,  'Information  Te chnology  -  Open Systems Interconnection - The Directory: Models .'
- [7]  ITU-T  Recommendation  X.509  (1997)  |  ISO/IEC  9594-8:1997,  ' Information  Technology  -  Open Systems Interconnection - The Directory: Authentication Framework .'
- [8]   ITU-T  Recommendation  X.509  (1997)/Cor.  1  (2000E)  |  ISO/IEC  9594-8:1998/Cor. 1: 2000(E), ' Technical Corrigendum 1 .'
- [9]  ITU-T  Recommendation  X.520  (1997)  |  ISO/IEC  9594-6:1997,  ' Information  Technology  -  Open Systems Interconnection - The Di rectory: Selected Attribute Types .'
- [10] ITU-T Recommendation X.680 (1997) | ISO 8824-1:1998, ' Information Technology - Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1): Specification of basic notation .'
- [11] ITU-T  Recommendation  X.681  (1997)  |  ISO/IEC  8824-2:1998,  ' Information Technology -  Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1): Information Object Specification .'
- [12] ITU-T  Recommendation  X.682  (1997)  |  ISO/IEC  8824-3:1998,  ' Information Technology -  Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1): Constraint Specification .'
- [13] ITU-T Recommendation  X.683  (1997)  |  ISO/IEC  8824-4:1998,  ' Information Technology -  Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1): Parameterization of ASN.1 Specifications .'
- [14] ITU-T  Recommendation  X.690  (1997)  |  ISO/IEC  8825 -1:1998,  ' Information  Technology -  ASN.1 encoding rules: Specification  of  Basic  Encoding  Rules  (BER),  Canonical  Encoding  Rules  (CER)  and Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER).'
- [15] R. Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk, D.Solo, ' Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure  - Certificate and CRL Profile ,' IETF RFC 2459, January 1999. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2459.txt.
- [16] RSA Laboratories ,  'PKCS  #1:  RSA  Cryptography  Standard ,' Version 2.0,  October  1998.  URL: http://www.rsalabs.com/pkcs.
- [17] WAP Forum, ' Wireless Application Protocol Architecture Specification ,' WAP-100-WAPArch19980430 -a. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/ .
- [18] WAP  Forum,  ' Wireless  Transport  Layer  Security  Specification ,'  WAP-199-WTLS-20000218-a. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/.
- [19] WAP Forum, ' Wireless Identity Module Specification ,' WAP-198-WIM-20000218-a. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/ .
- [20] WAP  Forum,  ' WMLScript Crypto  API  Library ,'  WAP-161-WMLScriptCrypto-19991105-a.  URL: http://www.wapforum.org.

- [21] WAP Forum, ' Specification of WAP Conformance Requirements ,'  WAP-221-CREQ -20010425 -a. URL: http://www.wapforum.org/.
- [22] WAP  Forum,  ' Wireless  Telephony  Application  Specification ,'  WAP-169-WTA-20000707-a.  URL: http://www.wapforum.org/.

## 3.2 Informative References

- [23] L.  Bassham,  R.  Housley,  W.  Polk,  ' Algorithms  and  Identifiers  for  the Internet  X.509  Public  Key Infrastructure Certificate and CRL profile ,' IETF Work in progress, March 2001. URL: http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-pkix-ipki -pkalgs-02.txt .
- [24] R.  Housley,  W.  Ford,  W.  Polk,  D.  Solo, 'Internet  X.509  Public  Key  Infrastructure  -  Certificate  and CRL Profile ,'  IETF  Work  in  progress,  April  2001 .  URL:  http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietfpkix-new-part1-06.txt .
- [25] S.  Kille,  M.  Wahl,  A.  Grimstad,  R.  Huber,  S.  Sataluri,  ' Using  Domains in LDAP/X.500 Distinguished Names ,' IETF RFC 2247, January 1998. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2247.txt .
- [26] M. Myers, R. Ankney, A. Malpani, S. Galperin, C. Adams ,  'Internet  X.509  Public  Key  Infrastructure  Online  Certificate  Status  Protocol -  OCSP ,'  IETF  RFC  2560,  June  1999.  URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/innotes/rfc2560.txt .
- [27] RSA  Laboratories,  'PKCS  #9:  Selected  Object  Classes  and  Attribute  Types,'  Version  2.0,  February 2000. URL: http://www.rsalabs.com/pkcs.
- [28] M. Wahl, T. Howes, S. Kille, ' Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (v3) ,' IETF RFC 2251, December 1997. URL: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2251.txt.
- [29] M. Wahl, S. Kille, T. Howes, 'Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (v3): UTF-8 String Representation  of  Distinguished  Names ,'  IETF  RFC  2253,  December  1997.  URL:  ftp://ftp.isi.edu/innotes/rfc2253.txt .

## 4  Definitions and Abbreviations

## 4.1 Definitions

The following are terms and conventions used throughout this specification.

In  this  document,  the  term  'Recognize'  stands  for  'object  is  parsed  as  needed,  and  i ts  value  may  thereafter  be processed,  displayed  or  ignored.'  The  term  'Process'  means  'Understand  and  act  in  accordance  with  a  given semantics.'

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",  "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY" and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in  [3].

## 4.2 Abbreviations

For the purposes of this specification, the following abbreviations apply:

ASN.1

Abstract Syntax Notation One, as defined in  [10], [11], [12] and [13].

CA

Certification Authority

CRL

Certificate Revocation List

DER

Distinguished Encoding Rules

EC

Elliptic Curve

ECDH

Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman

ECDSA

Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm

LDAP

Lightweight Directory Access Protocol

ME

Mobile Equipment

OCSP

Online Certificate Status Protocol

RSA

Rivest -Shamir-Adleman public key algorithm

TLS

Transport Layer Security

URL

Uniform Resource Locator

WAP

Wireless Application Protocol

WIM

WAP Identity Module

WTLS

Wireless Transport Layer Security

## 5  Requirements and Assumptions

## 5.1 Assumptions on the WAP Environment

For the purposes of t his specification, the WAP environment may be characterized in the following way:

- -Limited bandwidth between WAP clients and WAP servers
- -Limited memory resources in WAP clients
- -Limited computational capabilities in WAP clients

Further,  a  reasonable  assumption is that WAP servers are, in many cases, connected to, and inter-operating with, the Internet. A  certificate profile for use in this environment  should  therefore,  to  the  extent possible, take this characterization into account.

## 5.2 General Requirements on WAP Certificate Profiles

This  section  specifies  general  requirements  on  certificates,  which  are  to  be  used  in  the  WAP  environment  (as characterized in Section 5.1) and which may be transmitted in WAP protocols.

## 5.2.1  Reduced Footprint

When  defining  a  certificate  profile  for  WAP,  the  storage  requirements  for  the  certificate  needs  to  be  reduced,  but without  loss  of  the  functionality  that  makes  the  certificate  meaningful  and  useful.  The  certificate  must,  within  an appropriate context, identify the holder of the public key. It must also provide a secure binding between the key and its holder.

## 5.2.2  Limited Processing Requirements

When developing software, it is often possible to reduce the memory requirements of an application by increasing the processing  time.  This  type  of  time-memory  tradeoff  cannot  be  used  extensively  for  WAP  certificates,  since  WAP clients  (and  in  particular  the  WIM  [19]  card)  have  not  only  restricted  memory  size  but  also  relatively  limited proces sing power.

In  addition  to  the  burden  on  the  constrained  WAP  client,  additional  computation  requirements  may  also  cause problems  for  WAP  servers  that  interact  with  them.  While  WAP  servers  in  general  are  free  of  the  memory  and processing limitations of WAP clients, they must perform operations on behalf of a large number of clients in a small amount of time. Any significant increase in the time required to process a certificate could impair the server's ability to process transactions at the needed rate.

Some additional processing, above that required for existing certificate formats, may be required. In particular, a more computationally  intensive  data  encoding  method  may  be  used.  This  additional  processing  required  for  encoding should be small in comparison to that required for public or private key operations.

## 5.2.3  Security

Public key certificates are used to provide a secure binding between an entity and its public key. Any modification to the certificate format must provide at least the same level of security as existing certificates.

In  any  new  format,  the  security  of  the  data  representation  must  be  examined  as  well.  Signatures  must  be  properly padded  to  avoid  possible  forgery,  and  parameter  specifications  must  have  sufficient  integrity  protection  to  avoid substitution attacks.

## 5.2.4  Compatibility with Existing Infrastructure

To  the  extent  possible,  certificates  issued  in  conformance  with  this  specification  should  work  interchangeably  with other X.509 [7] certificates in certificate -processing Internet applications in order to leverage the existing infrastructure. Any new format that requires major changes to the installed base of certificate -processing products and CA infrastructure is unlikely to be easily adopted.

## 6  Certificate Profiles

## 6.1 General

This  section  defines  WAP  certificate  profiles.  The  profiles  are,  unless  otherwise  mentioned,  based  on  the  Internet Certificate Profile [15],  which  in  turn  is  based  on  the  format  defined  in [7].  For  full  implementation  of  this  section implementers are required to consult the underlying format and semantics defined in  [7] and  [15]. This specification provides, for each certificate type discussed, additional details regarding the contents of some individual fields in the certificate.   Certificates  issued  in  conformance  with  recommendations  and  requirements  in  this  section  will  be reasonably  compact,  and  MEs  MUST  be  able  to  process  certificates  of  size  up  to  at  least  700  bytes,  while  other certificate-processing entities MUST be able to process certificates of size up to at least 2000 bytes. MEs that support X.509-based server authentication MUST be able to process server certificates of size up to at least 1000 bytes and CA certificates of size up to at least 2000 bytes, in addition to requirements listed in Section 6.4, and SHOULD be able  to  process  longer  certificates.  Certificate -processing  clients  MUST  support  a  certificate  chain  depth  of  at  least three (i.e., two subordinate CA certificates between the end -entity certificate and the CA root certificate in the chain). A  client  that  encounters  a  certificate  or  certificate  chain  that  does  not  conform  to  this  profile  must  not  fail  the certificate processing in an uncontrolled manner.  In  addition,  certificate-processing servers must also support a chain depth of at least three.

ASN.1 definitions relevant for this section that are not supplied by the normative references can be found in Annex B .

## 6.2 User Certificates for Authentication

This  certificate  type  is  intended  for  client  authentication,  e.g.  in  WTLS  ([18])  or  TLS  ([4]).The certificate profile is intended for certificates stored in WAP clients such as handsets and WIM cards. Since it will not always be the case that the identity of the cardholder is  known at the time of certificate issuance, some certificates will bind a public key to some distinguishable entity (e.g. a particular WIM card), rather than to a specific subscriber.

## 6.2.1  Certificate Serial Number

CAs  claiming  conformance  with  this  specification  should  avoid  using  serial  numbers  longer  than  8  bytes  (63  bits, topmost bit cannot be set to 1 ).

## 6.2.2  Signature (Algorithm)

The only signature algorithms defined for use with this profile are sha1WithRSAEncryption and ecdsa-with-SHA1 , see  Section  9.  Certificate-processing  applications  MUST  be  able  to  verify  certificates  signed  with  one  of  these algorithms (certificate-processing applications need only support one of them).

## 6.2.3  Issuer (Name)

Applications claiming conformance with th is specification MUST recognize all required distinguished name attributes listed in Section 4.1.2.4 in [15] (i.e. attributes countryName , organizationName , organizationalUnitName , stateOrProvinceName , commonName and domainComponent ) and SHOULD recognize all other attributes listed in  Section  4.1.2.4  in  [15].  Further,  they  MUST  recognize  the serialNumber attribute  defined  in  Section  8  in  this document.  CAs  claiming  conformance  with  this  specification  are not required to issue certificates with the serialNumber attribute, but they should be able to do so. When including attributes with DirectoryString syntax,  CAs should use the UTF8String choice,  and  must  do  so  for  certificates  issued  after  December  31,  2003  (see  [15] ). This field must not be left empty.

## 6.2.4  Subject (Name)

As  for  the  Issuer  field,  applications  claiming  conformance  with  this   specification  MUST  recognize  all  required distinguished name attributes listed in Section 4.1.2.4 in  [15] (see above), and SHOULD recognize all other attributes listed in Section 4.1.2.4 in  [15]. Further, they MUST recognize the serialNumber attribute defined in Section  8 in this document.  CAs  claiming  conformance  with  this  specification are not required to issue certificates with  the serialNumber attribute,  but  are  encouraged to do so, especially for initial certificates stored in WAP clients. In those cases,  this  specification  also  recommends  that  it  be  the  only  attribute  in  subject  names.  Such  practice  will  result  in compact  certificates.  Whatever  the  practice  in  those  cases  are,  the  certificate  must  bind  the  public  key  to  a distinguishable entity (e.g. a particular WIM  card  or other key storage). When  including attributes with

DirectoryString syntax,  CAs should use the UTF8String choice, and must do so for certificates issued after December 31, 2003. This field must not be left empty.

## 6.2.5  Subject Public Key

The only public key types defined for use with this specification are rsaEncryption and i d-ecPublicKey (see  Section 9).  RSA  keys  should  be  1024  bits  or  longer.  EC  public  keys  should  be  160  bits  or  longer.  Certificate-processing applications are not required to handle keys longer than 2048 1 (RSA) or 163 (EC) bits.

## 6.2.6  Certificate Extensions

Certificate-processing  applications  claiming  conformance  with  this  specification  MUST  recognize  the  following standard extensions: keyUsage , extKeyUsage , certificatePolicies , subjectAltName , and basicConstraints . Further, they SHOULD recognize the nameConstraints , policyConstraints , authorityKeyIdentifier and subjectKeyIdentifier extensions.  If  the keyUsage extension is included, it shall have the digitalSignature bit  set  if the  public  key  is  an  RSA  key.  If  the  public  key  is  an  EC-DH  key, it shall have the keyAgreement bit set. For RSA keys, the extension may also have the keyEncipherment bit set. Other bits must not be set.  The keyUsage extension should be marked as critical.

NOTE 1  - The choice between the keyEncipherment bit  and  the keyAgreement bit  depends  on  the  particular  public  key algorithm; for RSA, it shall be keyEncipherment , for EC, it shall be keyAgreement .

NOTE 2 - This specification recommends that the certificatePolicies extension only consist of one CertPolicyId .  Conformin g certificate-processing applications are not required to recognize policyQualifiers .

CAs should not include the basicConstraints extension.

CAs  should,  if  including  the subjectKeyIdentifier and/or authorityKeyIdentifier extension,  use  the KeyIdentifier field, and calculate the value of that field in accordance with the procedure defined in Section 9.4.4 of [19].

Further,  certificate-processing  applications  claiming  conformance  with  this  specification  SHOULD  recognize  the domainInformation extension defined in Section  10. CAs may include this extension in issued certificat es.

NOTE - A  CA which does not include any extensions in issued certificates shall set the certificate version to 1 (i.e. the default value).

## 6.3 User Certificates for Digital Signatures

This  certificate  type  is  intended  for  verifications of digital  signatures,  created  for  example  by signText() in WMLScript [20]. The certificate profile is intended for certificates stored in WAP clients such as handsets and WIM cards.

The requirements on this certificate type are identical to the type in Section 6.2 , except that if the keyUsage extension is present (recommended), the only bits allowed to be set are the digitalSignature bit and/or the nonRepudation bit.

## 6.4 X.509-Compliant Server Certificates

## 6.4.1  Scope

This certificate type is intended for server authentication, e.g. in WTLS ([18]) or TLS ( [4] ).  The certificate profile is intended for certificates sent over the air in WAP protocols

## 6.4.2  Certificate Serial Number

CAs  claiming  conformance  with  this  specification  must  avoid  using  serial  numbers  longer  than  20  bytes  (159  bits since top-most bit must be set to 0). Clients MUST be able to recognize serial number values up to 20 bytes long.

NOTE - A client, which does not perform certificate status checking, only needs to parse this field.

1 While using 2048-bit RSA keys in conjunction with SHA-1-based signatures does not add any security over 1024-bit RSA keys, the requirement is included here for legacy reasons

## 6.4.3  Signature (Algorithm)

The only signature algorithms defined for use with this profile are sha1WithRSAEncryption and ecdsa-with-SHA1 (see Section 9).  Clients MUST support at least one of these algorithms. Clients that support server-authenticated TLS sessions MUST support sha1WithRSAEncryption . Clients MUST be able to process certificates signed with keys up to and including 2048 bits (RSA) or 233 bits (EC).

## 6.4.4  Issuer (Name)

Clients claiming conformance with this spe cification MUST recognize all required distinguished name attributes listed in Section 4.1.2.4 in [15] (i.e. attributes countryName , organizationName , organizationalUnitName , stateOrProvinceName , commonName ,  and domainComponent )  and SHOULD recognize all other attributes listed in  Section  4.1.2.4  in  [15].  Further,  they  MUST  recognize  the serialNumber attribute  defined  in  Section  8  in  this document. Clients MUST be able to process certificates (e.g. chain building) even if naming attributes are unknown. CAs  claiming  conformance  with  this  specification  are  not  required  to  issue  certificates  with  the serialNumber attribute, but they should be able to do so. When including attributes with DirectoryString syntax, CAs should use the UTF8String choice, and must do so for certificates issued after December 31, 2003 (see  [15]).  This field must not be left empty.

## 6.4.5  Subject (Name)

As  for the Issuer field, clients claiming conformance  with  this  specification  MUST  recognize  all  required distinguished name attributes listed in Section 4.1.2.4 in  [15] (see above), and SHOULD recognize all other attributes listed in Section 4.1.2.4 in  [15]. Further, they MUST recognize the serialNumber attribute defined in Section 8 in this document. Clients MUST be able to process certificates (e.g. chain building) even if naming attributes are unknown. CAs  claiming  conformance  with  this  specification  are  not  required  to  issue  certificates  with  the serialNumber attribute,  but  should  be  able  to  do  so.    When  including  attributes  with DirectoryString syntax,  CAs should use the UTF8String choice, and must do so for certificates issued after December 31, 2003. This field must not be left empty.

## 6.4.6  Subject Public Key

The only public key types defined for use with this specification are rsaEncryption and i d-cePublicKey (see Section 9). RSA keys should be 1024 bits or longer. EC public keys should be 16 0 bits or longer.

## 6.4.7  Certificate Extensions

Clients  MUST  recognize  the  following  standard  extensions,  which  may  appear  in  server  certificates: keyUsage , extKeyUsage , authorityKeyIdentifier , and subjectAltName ,. Further, they SHOULD recognize the certificatePolicies and authorityAccessInfo extensions.  Client  certificate  processing  MUST  NOT  fail  due  to  the presence of unrecognized, but non-critical, extensions.

For the extKeyUsage extension, clients MUST recognize the id-kp-serverAuth object identifier.

For the authorityKeyIdentifier extension, clients MUST recognize the keyIdentifier field.

For the subjectAltName extension,  clients  MUST  recognize  the dNSName and  the iPAddress choices  of  the GeneralName type.

For the certificatePolicies extension, clients  SHOULD recognize the CPSuri qualifier and the UserNotice qualifier, defined in [15], and SHOULD be able to process (i.e. retrieve and display) information conveyed in them.

Server certificates issued in conformance with this sp ecification extension should contain the authorityKeyIdentifier, keyUsage , extKeyUsage , and subjectAltName extensions.

Server certificates issued in conformance with this profile, which are intended for use in TLS sessions and contains the keyUsage extension,  must  have  key  usage  bits  set  in  accordance  with  [4],  Section  7.4.2.  CAs  should  mark  the keyUsage extension as critical.

Further,  server  certificates  issued  in  conformance  with  this  specification  must  include  the ip-kp-serverAuth object identifier  in  the extKeyUsage extension,  when  present,  and  are  recommended  to  use  the dNSName choice  in  the subjectAltName extension.

Conformant  CAs  should,  if  including  the subjectKeyIdentifier and/or authorityKeyIdentifier extension,  use  the KeyIdentifier type, and calculate the value of that type in accordance with the procedure defined in Section 9.4.4 of [19].

## 6.5 Role Certificates

This  version  of  this  specification  does  not  define  a  profile  for  role  certificates  (i.e.  certificates  giving  its  holders certain privileges, e.g. network operators). It is expected, however, that this will be included in later versions.

## 6.6 Authority Certificates

This  section  defines  a  profile  for  CA  certificates.  The  certificate  profile  is  intended  for  certificates  stored  in  WAP clients such as handsets and WIM cards, or sent over-the-air in WAP protocols.

NOTE  -  When  a  WTLS  Server  Certificate  has  been  issued  by  a  CA,  whose  public  key  only  exist  in  the  form  of  an  X.509certificate, a certificate-processing application may use the following procedure to find the corresponding CA certificate:

- -If the WTLSCertificate.ToBeSignedCertificate.issuer.identifier\_type is x509\_name ,  the  application  shall  assume  that  the  field  contains  a  full,  DER -encoded  distinguished name  from  a  corresponding  subject  field  in  an  X.509-certificate,  and  use  this  as  a  basis  for  further search. If no matching certificate can be found, the chaining fails.
- -If the WTLSCertificate.ToBeSignedCertificate.issuer.identifier\_type is key\_hash\_sha ,  the  application  shall  assume  that  the  field  contains  a  value  to  be  found  in  the  corresponding X.509-certificate's subjectKeyIdentifier extension or in the PKCS15CommonCertificateAttributes.requestId field  for  the  CA  certificate  in  question,  if  it  is  stored  in  a WIM. If no such certificate can be found, the chaining fails.

In all other cases (i.e. when the issuer.identifier\_type is of type text or binary ) the chaining procedure is undefined.

## 6.6.1  Certificate Serial Number

Same requirements as in Section  6.2.

## 6.6.2  Signature Algorithm

Same requirements as in Section  6.2.

## 6.6.3  Issuer (Name)

Same requirements as in Section  6.2.

## 6.6.4  Subject (Name)

In self-signed certificates, the subject name shall be the same as the issuer name. Apart from this, same requirements as in Section 6.2 .

## 6.6.5  Subject Public Key

Same requirements as in Section 6.4. Keys must be at least 1024 (RSA) or 160 (EC) bits long. WAP Clients MUST be able to process keys up to and including 2048 bits (RSA) or 233 bits (EC).

## 6.6.6  Certificate Extensions

Same requirements as in Section  6.2.6, except for the following differences:

- -The keyUsage extension should be present, and must have at least the keyCertSign bit set if present.
- -The basicConstraint extension must be present, and shall be critical. The cA component shall be set to TRUE , and the pathLenConstraint component need not be present.

Clients supporting X.509-based server authentication MUST be able to process the basicConstraint extension as well as the subjectKeyIdentifier extension.

## 6.7 Other Certificates

This  profile  does  not  put  any  requirements  on  other  certificates  used  in  the  WAP  environment  (i.e.  certificates  not transmitted  in  WAP  protocols  and  not  stored  in  WAP  clients),  but  recommends  that  these  certificates  be  issued  in conformance with the profile in [15].

## 7  CRL Profiles

As it is not expected that X.509 CRLs will be sent over the air in WAP protocols, or stored (or processed) by MEs, this specification does not put any requirements on the format of these data structures, but recommends that they be issued in conformance with the profile in [15].

## 8  Attributes

## 8.1 Distinguished Attributes

This  specification  define s  one  certificate  attribute  for  use  in  relative  distinguished  names.  Certificate-processing applications claiming conformance to this standard MUST recognize this attribute.  CAs are not required to include it in issued certificates, but are, as mentioned in Section  6, encouraged to do so under certain circumstances.

## 8.1.1  The serialNumber Attribute

The serialNumber attribute is intended to carry locally unique names (values). Use of this attribute provides for short subject  names,  while  maintaining  distinguished  name  requirements.  In  addition,  some  business  and  processing advantages  may  present  themselves  if  the  identifier  for  an  entity,  once  assigned,  remains  inva riant  over  a  CA's lifetime.  For  example,  this  enables  certificate -processing  systems  to  identify  a  particular  entity  even  when  keys  or other  distinguished  name  attributes  change  for  the  entity.  Privacy  concerns  must  also  be  taken  into  account  when considering such usage, however. CAs  including  this  attribute  in  the  subject  name  of  an  entity  must  not  reuse  the attribute  value  in  certificates  issued  to  other  entities.  When  included  in  CA  names,  it  can  be  a  representation  of  the hash  of  the  CA's  key  or  some  other  unique  value.  The  attribute  is  defined  in  [9] and reproduced here for reference purposes:

```
serialNumber ATTRIBUTE ::= { WITH SYNTAX PrintableString EQUALITY MATCHING RULE caseIgnoreMatch ID id-at-serialNumber }
```

## 8.2 WTLS Certificate reserved naming attribute types and values

This section lists WTLS certificate ([18], Section 10.5.2) naming attribute types and values that are 'reserved,' in the sense that other specifications MAY have special processing for PKI entities using them. CAs issuing certificates (or naming  themselves)  MUST  ONLY  use  these  reserved  naming  attribute  values  in  accordance  with  the  referenced specification.

- -WTA  entity:  WTLS  Certificate  naming  attribut e  ' T=wt a'  (' T=wt a'  is  the  X.520  naming  attribute title with value 'wta '). Governing specification: [22].
- -Certificate Authority: WTLS Certificate naming attribute ' T=ca ' (' T=ca ' represents the X.520 naming attribute title with value ' ca '). Governing specification: [18].

## 9  Signature Algorithms and Public-Key Types

Algorithms are represented in X.509 -certificates with the following ASN.1 type

```
AlgorithmIdentifier {ALGORITHM:AlgorithmSet} ::= SEQUENCE { algorithm ALGORITHM.&id ({AlgorithmSet}), parameters ALGORITHM.&Type ({AlgorithmSet}{@algorithm}) OPTIONAL }
```

ALGORITHM ::= TYPE-IDENTIFIER

A reference to parameterized type AlgorithmIdentifier{} tightly  binds  a  set  of algorithm object  identifiers to their associated parameters types.

## 9.1 Signature Algorithms

The following information object set may be augmented to meet local requirements.  Note that deleting members of the set, or adding members to it, may prevent interoperability with conforming implementations.

```
SupportedSignatureAlgorithms ALGORITHM ::= { {NULL IDENTIFIED BY sha1WithRSAEncryption} | {NULL IDENTIFIED BY ecdsa-with-SHA1}, ... -- For future (or local) extensions }
```

The  object  identifier  value  for sha1WithRSAEncryption can  be  foun d  in  [16].  When  this  algorithm  is  used,  the signing and formatting shall be done in accordance with the procedure defined in [16].

The  object  identifier  value  for ecdsa-with-SHA1 can  be  found  in [1]  (or  [23]).  When  this  algorithm  is  used,  the signing and formatting shall be done in accordance with the procedure defined in [1]. Parameters for the used Elliptic Curve shall be included in the subjectPublicKeyInfo field of the certificate for the authority issuing the certificate in question.

## 9.2 Public-Key Types

The following information object set may be augmented to meet local requirements.  Note that deleting members of the set, or adding members to it, may prevent interoperability with conforming implementations.

```
SupportedPublicKeyAlgorithms ALGORITHM ::= { {NULL IDENTIFIED BY rsaEncryption} | {Parameters IDENTIFIED BY id-ecPublicKey}, ... -- For future extensions }
```

The object identifier value for rsaEncryption can be found in  [16]. The format of the public key shall in this case be in accordance with [16].

The object identifier value for id-ecPublicKe y can be found in [1] . The format of the public key shall in this case be in accordance with [1]. The Parameters type is defined in [1] , and is repeated here for reference purposes:

```
Parameters ::= CHOICE { ecParameters  ECParameters, namedCurve    CURVES.&id({CurveNames}), implicitlyCA  NULL }
```

When EC parameters are inherited, the parameters field shall contain implictlyCA , which is the ASN.1 value NULL . This is the preferred option. When EC parameters are specified by reference, the parameters field shall contain the namedCurve choice, which is an object identifier. When EC parameters are explicitly included, they shall be encoded in the ASN.1 structure ECParameters .  Whatever the choice, only those values consistent with the curves defined in [18] are allowed. For example, the basic curve assigned number 5 in [18] shall be identified as follows:

```
ansi-x9-62 OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) 10045} -- WTLS basic curve assigned number 5 parameter Parameters ::= namedCurve : {ansi-x9-62 curves(3) characteristic-two(0) 1}
```

## 10  Certificate Extensions

## 10.1 The domainInformation Extension

This  extension  carries  in formation  that  pertain  to  the  usage  of  this  certificate  and  the  domain  in  which  it  has  been issued, such as:

- -whether  on-line  status  requests,  for  example  using  the  OCSP  ([26])  protocol,  are  required  before  using  this certificate;
- -the name of the domain root Certification Authority (optional); and
- -an  (optional)  URL  ( [2])  pointing  to  a  resource  containing  a  DER-encoded  ( [14])  value  of  type Extensions , carrying  more  ( non-critical) extensions linked to this certificate. The hash included in the certificate protects the integrity of this externally stored value.

This extension shall not be critical.

```
domainInformation EXTENSION ::= { SYNTAX DomainInformation IDENTIFIED BY  wap-ce-domainInformation } DomainInformation ::= SEQUENCE { domainInfoFlags DomainInfoFlags DEFAULT {onLineStatusRequest}, domainAuthorityIdentifier Name {{SupportedNamingAttributes}} OPTIONAL, otherExtensions [0] ExtensionReference OPTIONAL, ... -- For future extensions } (CONSTRAINED BY {-- Critical extensions may not be referenced but must be explicitly included --}) DomainInfoFlags ::= BIT STRING { onLineStatusRequest (0) } ExtensionReference ::= SEQUENCE { url IA5String, -- URL in accordance with [2] pointing to a DER-encoded value of type Extensions digest Digest } Digest ::= SEQUENCE { digestAlgorithm   AlgorithmIdentifier {{DigestAlgorithms}} DEFAULT sha1, digest OCTET STRING (SIZE(8..wap-ub-digest)) }
```

The domainInfoFlags.onLineStatusRequest bit, when set, indicates that a certificate -processing  application  should perform some on-line checking of the certificates' status before using it.

The domainAuthorityIdentifier field  will,  when  present,  contain  the  distinguished  name  of  the  domain  root  CA. Inclusion of this in an end -entity certificate may simplify policy-checking, certificate chain traversal, etc.

The otherExtensions field will, when present, contain a URL pointing to other (non -critical) extensions pertaining to this certificate, and a digest of those extensions (the digest shall be calculated on the whole DER-value, including tag and length, of an Extensions PDU).

## Annex A Object Classes

This  specification  defines  one  new  object  class, wapEntity ,  in  support  of  the  attributes  defined  in  Section 8. The purpose  of  this  object  class  is  to  enable  usage  (e.g.  storage,  lookup)  of  those  attributes  in  Directory-enabled environments. As an  alternative, the naturalPerson object class, defined in [27], can be used.

## A.1 The wapEntity Object Class

This auxiliary object class is intended to hold WAP-specific attributes for entities. It has been designed for use within directory services based on the LDAP protocol ([28]) and the X.500 family of protocols ([5],  [6]), where support for WAP-defined attributes is considered useful.

```
wapEntity OBJECT-CLASS ::= { SUBCLASS OF { top } KIND auxiliary MAY CONTAIN { WAPEntityAttributeSet } ID wap-oc-wapEntity } WAPEntityAttributeSet ATTRIBUTE ::= { serialNumber, … -- For future extensions }
```

## Annex B ASN.1 Module

This  annex  includes  all  of  the  ASN.1  type,  value,  and  information  object  class  definitions  contained  in  this specification, in the form of the ASN.1 module WAPCertificateProfiles ( external type, value and class definitions are imported  from  modules  in  normative  references) . To simplify strict  type  checking  and  adherence  to  profiles  in  this specification,  the  module  contains  a  definition  of  the WAPCertificate type  (compatible  with  the Certificate type defined in  [7])  as  well.  This  module  could  be  input  to  an  ASN.1  compiler  for  the  purpose  of  verifying  syntactic correctness or automatic generation of ASN.1-handling code.

WAPCertificateProfiles {joint-iso-itu-t(1) identified -organizations(23) wap(43) modules(0) certificate -profiles(1)}

DEFINITIONS IMPLICIT TAGS ::=

```
BEGIN -- EXPORTS All --- All types and values defined in this module are exported for use in other ASN.1 modules. IMPORTS informationFramework, selectedAttributeTypes, authenticationFramework, certificateExtensions FROM UsefulDefinitions {joint-iso-itu-t(2) ds(5) module(1) usefulDefinitions(0) 3} ATTRIBUTE, OBJECT-CLASS, top FROM InformationFramework informationFramework countryName, organizationName, organizationalUnitName, stateOrProvinceName, commonName, serialNumber FROM SelectedAttributeTypes selectedAttributeTypes SIGNED, ALGORITHM, EXTENSION, Version, Validity FROM AuthenticationFramework authenticationFramework keyUsage, extKeyUsage, certificatePolicies, subjectAltName, basicConstraints, nameConstraints, policyConstraints, authorityKeyIdentifier, subjectKeyIdentifier FROM CertificateExtensions certificateExtensions rsaEncryption, sha1WithRSAEncryption FROM PKCS-1 {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) rsadsi(113549) pkcs(1) pkcs-1(1) modules(0) pkcs-1(1)} id-ecPublicKey, ecdsa-with-SHA1, Parameters FROM ANSI-X9-62 {iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) 10045 module(4) 1} id-sha1 FROM OIWSECSIGAlgorithmObjectIdentifiers {iso(1) identified-organization(3) oiw(14) secsig(3) oiwsecsigalgorithmobjectidentifiers(1)}; -- Upper bounds -wap-ub-depth INTEGER ::= 5 wap-ub-width INTEGER ::= 1 wap-ub-extensions INTEGER ::= 255 wap-ub-attributes INTEGER ::= 255 wap-ub-publicKey INTEGER ::= 5000 wap-ub-digest INTEGER ::= 255 -- Object Identifiers -wap OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {joint-iso-itu-t(2) identified-organizations(23) 43} wap-at   OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {wap 2} -- Attributes branch wap-ce  OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {wap 3} -- Certificate extensions branch wap-oc  OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {wap 4} - Object class branch wap-ce-domainInformation OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {wap-ce 1} wap-oc-wapEntity OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {wap-oc 1}
```

```
-- WAP certificate syntax -WAPCertificateInfo ::= SEQUENCE { version [0] EXPLICIT Version DEFAULT v1, serialNumber CertificateSerialNumber, signature AlgorithmIdentifier {{SupportedSignatureAlgorithms}}, issuer Name {{SupportedNamingAttributes}}, validity Validity, subject Name {{SupportedNamingAttributes}}, subjectPublicKeyInfo SubjectPublicKeyInfo {{SupportedPublicKeyAlgorithms}}, extensions [3] EXPLICIT Extensions {{SupportedExtensions}} OPTIONAL-- if present, -- version must be v3 } WAPCertificate ::= SIGNED {WAPCertificateInfo} CertificateSerialNumber ::= INTEGER -- Recommended to be less than 8 bytes AlgorithmIdentifier {ALGORITHM:AlgorithmSet} ::= SEQUENCE { algorithm ALGORITHM.&id ({AlgorithmSet}), parameters ALGORITHM.&Type ({AlgorithmSet}{@algorithm}) OPTIONAL } SupportedPublicKeyAlgorithms ALGORITHM ::= { {NULL IDENTIFIED BY rsaEncryption} | {Parameters IDENTIFIED BY id-ecPublicKey}, ... -- For future extensions } SupportedSignatureAlgorithms ALGORITHM ::= { {NULL IDENTIFIED BY sha1WithRSAEncryption} | {NULL IDENTIFIED BY ecdsa-with-SHA1}, ... -- For future extensions } Name {ATTRIBUTE: IOSet} ::= CHOICE { rdnSequence SEQUENCE SIZE (1..wap-ub-depth) OF RelativeDistinguishedName {{IOSet}} } RelativeDistinguishedName {ATTRIBUTE : IOSet} ::= SET SIZE(1..wap-ub-width) OF AttributeTypeAndValue {{IOSet}} AttributeTypeAndValue {ATTRIBUTE : IOSet} ::= SEQUENCE { type ATTRIBUTE.&id ({IOSet}), value ATTRIBUTE.&Type ({IOSet}{@type}) } SupportedNamingAttributes ATTRIBUTE ::= { countryName | organizationName | organizationalUnitName | stateOrProvinceName | commonName | domainComponent | serialNumber, ... -- For future extensions } -- Defined here for easier access (see IETF RFC 2247) domainComponent ATTRIBUTE ::= { WITH SYNTAX IA5String ID         { 0 9 2342 19200300 100 1 25} } SubjectPublicKeyInfo {ALGORITHM: IOSet} ::= SEQUENCE { algorithm AlgorithmIdentifier {{IOSet}}, subjectPublicKey BIT STRING (SIZE(1..wap-ub-publicKey)) } Extensions {EXTENSION : IOSet} ::= SEQUENCE SIZE (1..wap-ub-extensions) OF Extension {{IOSet}} Extension {EXTENSION : IOSet} ::= SEQUENCE { extnId EXTENSION.&id ({IOSet}), critical BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE,
```

```
extnValue OCTET STRING }(CONSTRAINED BY {-- extnValue must contain a DER-encoded value of type EXTENSION.&Extntype -- for the object identified  by extnId --}) domainInformation EXTENSION ::= { SYNTAX DomainInformation IDENTIFIED BY  wap-ce-domainInformation } DomainInformation ::= SEQUENCE { domainInfoFlags DomainInfoFlags DEFAULT {onLineStatusRequest}, domainAuthorityIdentifier Name {{SupportedNamingAttributes}} OPTIONAL, otherExtensions [0] ExtensionReference OPTIONAL, ... -- For future extensions } (CONSTRAINED BY {-- This extension should not be critical--}) DomainInfoFlags ::= BIT STRING { onLineStatusRequest (0) } ExtensionReference ::= SEQUENCE { url IA5String, -- URL in accordance with pointing to a DER-encoded value of type Extensions digest Digest } Digest ::= SEQUENCE { digestAlgorithm   AlgorithmIdentifier {{DigestAlgorithms}} DEFAULT sha1, digest OCTET STRING (SIZE(8..wap-ub-digest)) } DigestAlgorithms ALGORITHM ::= { {NULL IDENTIFIED BY id-sha1}, ... -- For future extensions } sha1 AlgorithmIdentifier {{DigestAlgorithms}} ::= {algorithm id-sha1, parameters SHA1Parameters : NULL} SHA1Parameters ::= NULL SupportedExtensions EXTENSION ::= { domainInformation | keyUsage | extKeyUsage | certificatePolicies | subjectAltName | basicConstraints | nameConstraints | policyConstraints | authorityKeyIdentifier | subjectKeyIdentifier, ... -- For future extensions } wapEntity OBJECT-CLASS ::= { SUBCLASS OF { top } KIND auxiliary MAY CONTAIN { WAPEntityAttributeSet } ID wap-oc-wapEntity } WAPEntityAttributeSet ATTRIBUTE ::= { serialNumber, … -- For future extensions } END
```

## Annex C Static Conformance Requirements

## C.1  ME Options

## C.1.1. General Certificate Options

This table specifies generic certificate-processing requirements for MEs 2 .  In the table, 'M' stands for 'Mandatory to implement' and 'O' stands for 'Optional.'

| Item          | Functio n                         | Sub-Function                                                                                                                                                   | Reference   | Status   | Requirements   |
|---------------|-----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|----------|----------------|
| Cert-Gen-C-01 | General X.509 Certificate support | Parsing of fields as needed for functionality outlined below                                                                                                   | 6           |          | M              |
| Cert-Gen-C-02 | General X.509 Certificate support | Able to handle client certificates at least up to 700 bytes long                                                                                               | 6           |          | M              |
| Cert-Gen-C-03 | Issuer Name                       | Recognize the following required RFC 2459 attributes: countryName, organizationName, organizationalUnitName, commonName, stateOrProvinceName, domainComponent  | 6.2, 6.4    | 6.3 ,    | M              |
| Cert-Gen-C-04 | Issuer Name                       | Recognize all recommended RFC 2459 attributes: localityName, title, surname, givenName, initials, generationQualifier                                          | 6.2, 6.4    | 6.3 ,    | O              |
| Cert-Gen-C-05 | Issuer Name                       | Capable of displaying PrintableString , UTF8String and NumericString values                                                                                    | 6.2, 6.4    | 6.3 ,    | M              |
| Cert-Gen-C-06 | Issuer Name                       | Recognize the serialNumber attribute                                                                                                                           | 6.2, 6.4    | 6.3 ,    | M              |
| Cert-Gen-C-07 | Subject Name                      | Recognize the following required RFC 2459 attributes : countryName, organizationName, organizationalUnitName, commonName, stateOrProvinceName, domainComponent | 6.2, 6.4    | 6.3 ,    | M              |
| Cert-Gen-C-08 | Subject Name                      | Recognize all recommended RFC 2459 attributes : localityName, title, surname, givenName, initials, generationQualifier                                         | 6.2, 6.4    | 6.3 ,    | O              |
| Cert-Gen-C-09 | Subject Name                      | Capable of displaying PrintableString, UTF8String and NumericString values                                                                                     | 6.2, 6.4    | 6.3 ,    | M              |
| Cert-Gen-C-10 | Subject Name                      | Recognize the serialNumber attribute                                                                                                                           | 6.2, 6.4    | 6.3 ,    | M              |

## C.1.2. X.509 Server Certificate options

This table specifies certificate-processing requirements for MEs that support X.509-based server authentication.

| Item                          | Function                          | Sub-Function                                                                                                                                                  | Reference    | Status   | Requirements   |
|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|----------|----------------|
| Cert-SrvA-C-01 Cert-SrvA-C-02 | General X.509 Certificate support | Parsing of all fields Able to process server certificates at least up to 1000 bytes long (CA certificates 2000 bytes)                                         | 6.1 6.4.1    | M M      |                |
| Cert-SrvA-C-03                | General X.509 Certificate support | Capable of processing certificates with unknown distinguished name attributes (e.g. needed for chain building)                                                | 6.4.4 6.4.5  | M        |                |
| Cert-SrvA-C-04                | General X.509 Certificate support | Capable of processing certificates with unknown, non-critical certificate extensions                                                                          | 6.4.7        | M        |                |
| Cert-SrvA-C-05                | Verification                      | Certificate path processing as defined in [7] (and [8]), but subject to limitations in Section 6.4 and 6.1                                                    | 6.4, 6.1     | M        |                |
| Cert-SrvA-C-06                | Serial Number                     | Handling of serial numbers up to 20 bytes long                                                                                                                | 6.4.2        | M        |                |
| Cert-SrvA-C-07                | Issuer Name                       | Recognize the following required RFC 2459 attributes: countryName, organizationName, organizationalUnitName, commonName, stateOrProvinceName, domainComponent | 6.4.4        | M        |                |
| Cert-SrvA-C-08                | Issuer Name                       | Recognize all recommended RFC 2459 attributes: localityName, title, surname, givenName, initials, generationQualifier                                         | 6.4.4        | O        |                |
| Cert-SrvA-C-09                | Issuer Name                       | Recognize the serialNumber attribute                                                                                                                          | 6.4.4        | M        |                |
| Cert-SrvA-C-10                | Subject Name                      | Recognize the following required RFC 2459 attributes: countryName, organizationName, organizationalUnitName, commonName, stateOrProvinceName, domainComponent | 6.4.4, 6.4.5 | M        |                |
| Cert-SrvA-C-11                | Subject Name                      | Recognize all recommended RFC 2459 attributes: localityName, title, surname, givenName, initials, generationQualifier                                         | 6.4.4, 6.4.5 | O        |                |
| Cert-SrvA-C-12                | Subject Name                      | Recognize the serialNumber attribute                                                                                                                          | 6.4.4, 6.4.5 | M        |                |

| Cert-SrvA-C-13   | Extensions           | Recognize and process ex tensions as specified in this document: keyUsage , subjectAltName , extKeyUsage , authorityKeyIdentifier . For CA certificates, must also process the basicConstraints and subjectKeyIdentifier extension.   | 6.4.7 6.6.6   | M   |                                  |
|------------------|----------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|-----|----------------------------------|
| Cert-SrvA-C-14   | Extensions           | Recognize and process extensions as specified in this document: certificatePolicies, authorityAccessInfo                                                                                                                              | 6.4.7         | O   |                                  |
| Cert-SrvA-C-15   | Signature Algorithms | Capable of processing certificates signed with at least one of the algorithms specified in this document                                                                                                                              | 6.4.3         | M   | Cert-SrvA-C-16 OR Cert-SrvA-C-17 |
| Cert-SrvA-C-16   | Signature Algorithms | Capable of verifying signatures made with RSA keys up to and including 2048 bits                                                                                                                                                      | 6.4.3         | O   |                                  |
| Cert-SrvA-C-17   | Signature Algorithms | Capable of verifying signatures made with EC keys up to and including 233 bits                                                                                                                                                        | 6.4.3         | O   |                                  |

## C.1.3. TLS Certificate options

This table specifies further certificate -processing  requirements for those MEs that support server-authenticated TLS sessions.

| Item          | Function             | Sub-Function                                                                     | Reference   | Status   | Requirements   |
|---------------|----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|----------|----------------|
| Cert-TLS-C-01 | Signature Algorithms | Capable of verifying signatures made with RSA keys up to and including 2048 bits | 6.4.3       | M        |                |

## C.2  Certificate-processing application Option

This  section  specifies  requirements  on  certificate  processing  WAP  applications  not  located  in  the  ME,  e.g.  WTLS servers.

## C.2.1 General Certificate Options

This  table specifies generic  certificate -processing requirements.  In  the t able,  'M'  stands  for  'Mandatory  to implement' and 'O' stands for 'Optional.

| Item                                                                      | Function                                                                  | Sub-Function                                                                                                                                                  | Reference                                                                 | Status                                                                    |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Cert-Gen-S-01                                                             | General X.509 Certificate support                                         | Parsing of all fields                                                                                                                                         | 6                                                                         | M                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-02                                                             | General X.509 Certificate support                                         | Able to handle certificates at least up to 2000 bytes long                                                                                                    | 6                                                                         | M                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-03                                                             | General X.509 Certificate support                                         | Capable of processing certificates with unknown distinguished name attributes (e.g. needed for chain building)                                                | 6                                                                         | M                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-04                                                             | Verification                                                              | Certificate path processing as defined in [7] (and [8]).                                                                                                      | 6.1                                                                       | M                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-05                                                             | Issuer Name                                                               | Recognize the following required RFC 2459 attributes: countryName, organizationName, organizationalUnitName, commonName, stateOrProvinceName, domainComponent | 6.2, 6.3                                                                  | M                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-06                                                             | Issuer Name                                                               | Recognize all recommended RFC 2459 attributes: localityName, title, surname, givenName, initials, generationQualifier                                         | 6.2, 6.3                                                                  | O                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-07                                                             | Issuer Name                                                               | Recognize the serialNumber attribute                                                                                                                          | 6.2, 6.3                                                                  | M                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-08                                                             | Subject Name                                                              | Recognize the following required RFC 2459 attributes: countryName, organizationName, organizationalUnitName, commonName, stateOrProvinceName, domainComponent | 6.2, 6.3                                                                  | M                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-09                                                             | Subject Name                                                              | Recognize all recommended RFC 2459 attributes: localityName, title, surname, givenName, initials, generationQualifier                                         | 6.2, 6.3                                                                  | O                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-10                                                             | Subject Name                                                              | Recognize the serialNumber attribute                                                                                                                          | 6.2, 6.3                                                                  | M                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-11                                                             | Extensions                                                                | Recognize and process extensions as specified in this document                                                                                                | 6                                                                         | M                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-12                                                             | Extensions                                                                | Recognize and process the domainInformation extension                                                                                                         | 10                                                                        | O                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-13                                                             | Signature Algorithms                                                      | Capable of processing certificates signed with at least one of the algorithms specified in this document                                                      | 9                                                                         | M                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-14                                                             | Signature Algorithms                                                      | Capable of verifying signatures made with RSA keys up to and including 2048 bits                                                                              | 6.6.5                                                                     | O                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-15                                                             | Signature Algorithms                                                      | Capable of verifying signatures made with EC keys up to and including 233 bits                                                                                | 6.6.5                                                                     | O                                                                         |
| Cert-Gen-S-16                                                             | Chain Processing                                                          | Process certificate chains of at least 3                                                                                                                      | 6.1                                                                       | M                                                                         |
| NOTE - Only one of Cert-Gen-S-14and Cert-Gen-S-15 need to be implemented. | NOTE - Only one of Cert-Gen-S-14and Cert-Gen-S-15 need to be implemented. | NOTE - Only one of Cert-Gen-S-14and Cert-Gen-S-15 need to be implemented.                                                                                     | NOTE - Only one of Cert-Gen-S-14and Cert-Gen-S-15 need to be implemented. | NOTE - Only one of Cert-Gen-S-14and Cert-Gen-S-15 need to be implemented. |

## Annex D Certificate Examples

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT - These examples have been developed with the help of the OSS ASN.1 compiler.

## D.1  Example of a client certificate for authentication

The certificate is shown both as a dump of the WAPCertificateInfo contents and as a hexadecimal dump of the whole certificate.

```
WAPCertificateInfo SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 270 serialNumber SerialNumber INTEGER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 2] primitive; length = 4
```

```
1234567890 signature SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 13 algorithm OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 9 { 1 2 840 113549 1 1 5 } parameters OpenType 0x0500 issuer SEQUENCE OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 38 SET OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 17] constructed; length = 18 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 16 type OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 4 10 } -- OrganizationName value OpenType 0x0c0941434d4520496e632e -- "ACME Inc." SET OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 17] constructed; length = 16 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 14 type OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 4 3 } -- commonName value OpenType 0x0c0754657374204341 -- "Test CA" validity Validity SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 30 notBefore Time CHOICE utcTime UTCTime: tag = [UNIVERSAL 23] primitive; length = 13 000101110000Z notAfter Time CHOICE utcTime UTCTime: tag = [UNIVERSAL 23] primitive; length = 13 001101100000Z subject SEQUENCE OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 15 SET OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 17] constructed; length = 13 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 11 type OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 4 5 } -- serialNumber value OpenType
```

```
0x130431303031 -- "1001" subjectPublicKeyInfo SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 157 algorithm SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 13 algorithm OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 9 { 1 2 840 113549 1 1 1 } parameters OpenType 0x0500 subjectPublicKey BIT STRING: tag = [UNIVERSAL 3] primitive; length = 139 0x0030818702818100b8488400d4b6088be48ead459ca19ec717aaf3d1d4ee3ecca49612... Hexadecimal dump of the signed certificate : 308201A5 3082010E 02044996 02D2300D 06092A86 4886F70D 01010505 00302631 12301006 0355040A 0C094143 4D452049 6E632E31 10300E06 03550403 0C075465 73742043 41301E17 0D303030 31303131 31303030 305A170D 30303131 30313130 30303030 5A300F31 0D300B06 03550405 13043130 30313081 9D300D06 092A8648 86F70D01 01010500 03818B00 30818702 818100B8 488400D4 B6088BE4 8EAD459C A19EC717 AAF3D1D4 EE3ECCA4 96128A13 597D16CC 8B85EB37 EFCE110C 63B01E68 4E5CF632 291EAC60 FD153C26 6EAAC36A D4CEA923 19F9BFDD 261AD2BF E41EAB4E 17FE6783 41EE52D9 A0A8B4DE C07B7ACC 76762514 045CEE99 94E0CF37 BAE05F8D E33B35FF 98BCE777 42CE4B12 273BD122 137FE902 0105300D 06092A86 4886F70D 01010505 00038181 00202BB7 D273C08B 9A0BF4D0 3B314FEB 2A30BC4E 4929DC30 A6CB3EA1 4760D991 A3C083A8 C59E33D8 A5A866F0 E94A33B0 92FA6A31 95D7E8C5 FD9B5E4E 673F2C1C 6ECF5C0D 511A905E C300F672 61774275 084DA194 FBF4F01C BD9DABB7 CD32044F 350B0DC6 1081E68B 10AC2ACD 9E526312 D737B665 08FC48B0 A0074516 9E7FEC12 1E D.2  Example of a CA certificate The certificate can be used to verify the signature of the client certificate in the previous section. WAPCertificateInfo SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 318 version : tag = [0] constructed; length = 3 Version INTEGER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 2] primitive; length = 1 2 serialNumber SerialNumber INTEGER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 2] primitive; length = 1 1 signature SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 13 algorithm OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 9 { 1 2 840 113549 1 1 5 } parameters OpenType 0x0500 issuer SEQUENCE OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 38 SET OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 17] constructed; length = 18
```

```
SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 16 type OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 4 10 } -- organizationName value OpenType 0x0c0941434d4520496e632e -- "ACME Inc." SET OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 17] constructed; length = 16 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 14 type OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 4 3 } -- commonName value OpenType 0x0c0754657374204341 -- "Test CA" validity Validity SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 30 notBefore Time CHOICE utcTime UTCTime: tag = [UNIVERSAL 23] primitive; length = 13 000101100000Z notAfter Time CHOICE utcTime UTCTime: tag = [UNIVERSAL 23] primitive; length = 13 001111100000Z subject SEQUENCE OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 38 SET OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 17] constructed; length = 18 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 16 type OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 4 10 } -- organizationName value OpenType 0x0c0941434d4520496e632e -- "ACME Inc." SET OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 17] constructed; length = 16 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 14 type OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 4 3 } -- commonName value OpenType 0x0c0754657374204341 "Test CA" subjectPublicKeyInfo SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 159 algorithm SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 13 algorithm OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 9 { 1 2 840 113549 1 1 1 } parameters OpenType 0x0500 subjectPublicKey BIT STRING: tag = [UNIVERSAL 3] primitive; length = 141 0x0030818902818100ad1f35964b3674c807b9f8a645d2c8174e514b69a4b46a7382915a... extensions : tag = [3] constructed; length = 19
```

SEQUENCE OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 17 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 15 extnId OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 29 19 }-- basicConstraints critical BOOLEAN: tag = [UNIVERSAL 1] primitive; length = 1 TRUE extnValue OCTET STRING: tag = [UNIVERSAL 4] primitive; length = 5 0x30030101ff Hexadecimal dump of the self-signed CA certificate: 308201D5 3082013E A0030201 02020101 300D0609 2A864886 F70D0101 05050030 26311230 10060355 040A0C09 41434D45 20496E63 2E311030 0E060355 04030C07 54657374 20434130 1E170D30 30303130 31313030 3030305A 170D3030 31313131 31303030 30305A30 26311230 10060355 040A0C09 41434D45 20496E63 2E311030 0E060355 04030C07 54657374 20434130 819F300D 06092A86 4886F70D 01010105 0003818D 00308189 02818100 AD1F3596 4B3674C8 07B9F8A6 45D2C817 4E514B69 A4B46A73 82915ABB C44ECCED E914DAE8 FCC023AB CEA9C533 80E64179 5CB0DDA6 64B872FC 109F9BBB 852BF42D 994F634C 681608E3 88DCE240 B558513E 5B60027B D1A07CEF 9C9B6DB3 7C7E1F1A BD238EED 96E4B669 056B260F 55E83F14 E6027127 C9DEB3AD 18AFCD3F 8A5F5BF5 02030100 01A31330 11300F06 03551D13 0101FF04 05300301 01FF300D 06092A86 4886F70D 01010505 00038181 0029E927 40EC957B 313933B1 DD45BB7B 2DA2BC03 A4C40224 5B183E36 E4FE4FB8 948D1155 F47938CC 422C6D77 52F0FAAF FEC11E05 8B6945E3 D7FA8208 B2367A10 6BD546B7 33C235C9 D4DC21F5 B9A1903D B9B19D97 985DBABB 67146949 43C362ED 662872F4 A7C2C859 F6F47752 F25FABD3 E056A7AF E16A96F4 8FC7ADEA 92057A2D 5C D.3  Example of a server certificate for server authentication The certificate is shown both as an ASN.1 dump of the contents and as a hexadecimal dump of the whole certificate. The  certificate  contains  a  (critical) keyUsage extension, an extKeyUsage extension,  a subjectAltName extension ( dNSName alternative),  and an authorityKeyIdentifier extension. The size of the certificate is 552 bytes. ASN.1 dump of  the certificate information: WAPCertificateInfo SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 397 version : tag = [0] constructed; length = 3 Version INTEGER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 2] primitive; length = 1 2 serialNumber SerialNumber INTEGER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 2] primitive; length = 3 5678901 signature SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 13 algorithm OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 9 { 1 2 840 113549 1 1 5 } -- sha1WithRSAEncryption parameters OpenType -- NULL 0x0500

```
issuer SEQUENCE OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 38 SET OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 17] constructed; length = 18 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 16 type OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 4 10 } -- organizationName value OpenType -- UTF8String 0x0c0941434d4520496e632e -- "ACME Inc." SET OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 17] constructed; length = 16 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 14 type OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 4 3 } -- commonName value OpenType -- UTF8String 0x0c0754657374204341 -- "Test CA" validity Validity SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 30 notBefore Time CHOICE utcTime UTCTime: tag = [UNIVERSAL 23] primitive; length = 13 000101110000Z notAfter Time CHOICE utcTime UTCTime: tag = [UNIVERSAL 23] primitive; length = 13 011101100000Z subject SEQUENCE OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 34 SET OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 17] constructed; length = 11 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 9 type OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 4 6 } -- countryName value OpenType -- PrintableString 0x13025553 -- "US" SET OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 17] constructed; length = 19 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 17 type OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 4 10 } -- organizationName value OpenType -- PrintableString 0x130a43657274732052205573 -- "Certs R Us" subjectPublicKeyInfo SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 157 algorithm SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 13 algorithm OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 9 { 1 2 840 113549 1 1 1 } -- rsaEncryption parameters OpenType -- NULL 0x0500
```

```
subjectPublicKey BIT STRING: tag = [UNIVERSAL 3] primitive; length = 139 0x0030818702818100b8488400d4b6088be48ead459ca19ec717aaf3d1d4ee3ecc... extensions : tag = [3] constructed; length = 102 SEQUENCE OF: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 100 SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 14 extnId OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 29 15 } -- keyUsage critical BOOLEAN: tag = [UNIVERSAL 1] primitive; length = 1 TRUE extnValue OCTET STRING: tag = [UNIVERSAL 4] primitive; length = 4 0x030205a0 -- digitalSignature, keyEncipherment SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 19 extnId OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 29 37 } -- extKeyUsage extnValue OCTET STRING: tag = [UNIVERSAL 4] primitive; length = 12 0x300a06082b06010505070301 -- {id-kp-serverAuth} SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 28 extnId OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 29 17 } -- subjectAltName extnValue OCTET STRING: tag = [UNIVERSAL 4] primitive; length = 21 0x301382117761702e63657274732d722d75732e7573 -- dNSName : "wap.certs-r-us.us" SEQUENCE: tag = [UNIVERSAL 16] constructed; length = 31 extnId OBJECT IDENTIFIER: tag = [UNIVERSAL 6] primitive; length = 3 { 2 5 29 35 } -- authorityKeyIdentifier extnValue OCTET STRING: tag = [UNIVERSAL 4] primitive; length = 24 0x30168014000102030405060708090a0b0c0d0e0ffedcba98 Hexadecimal dump of the signed certificate : 30820224 3082018D A0030201 02020356 A735300D 06092A86 4886F70D 01010505 00302631 12301006 0355040A 0C094143 4D452049 6E632E31 10300E06 03550403 0C075465 73742043 41301E17 0D303030 31303131 31303030 305A170D 30313131 30313130 30303030 5A302231 0B300906 03550406 13025553 31133011 06035504 0A130A43 65727473 20522055 7330819D 300D0609 2A864886 F70D0101 01050003 818B0030 81870281 8100B848 8400D4B6 088BE48E AD459CA1 9EC717AA F3D1D4EE 3ECCA496 128A1359 7D16CC8B 85EB37EF CE110C63 B01E684E 5CF63229 1EAC60FD 153C266E AAC36AD4 CEA92319 F9BFDD26 1AD2BFE4 1EAB4E17 FE678341 EE52D9A0 A8B4DEC0 7B7ACC76 76251404 5CEE9994 E0CF37BA E05F8DE3 3B35FF98 BCE77742 CE4B1227 3BD12213 7FE90201 05A36630 64300E06 03551D0F 0101FF04 04030205 A0301306 03551D25 040C300A 06082B06 01050507 0301301C 0603551D 11041530 13821177 61702E63 65727473 2D722D75 732E7573 301F0603 551D2304 18301680
```

14000102 03040506 0708090A 0B0C0D0E 0FFEDCBA 98300D06 092A8648 86F70D01 01050500 03818100 530D71EC C3F44439 08125646 63709402 19555609 F3ECB411 D39DFD79 9F48A418 92EBC51D 2FF0EB3E 341CC834 B81DDC43 53B5FD4D D34760A7 12ECF610 20C77F0A D387A235 739C1D82 45C049B3 817D32DD 661C67BE A4588A52 68DB4156 669B92B2 DE66A4CE 57C4FDC8 ABDADCC3 5BD3EDDF 6F018B93 ACAD4AE6 E9637EC2 D379B48B
