## Specification Information Note OMA -WAP-224\_002-WTP-SIN-20020827-a

Version 27-Aug-2002

for

Open Mobile Alliance OMA-WAP-224-WTP-20010710-a Wireless Transport Protocol Version 10-Jul-2001

## Continues the Technical Activities Originated in the WAP Forum

© 2002, Open Mobile Alliance, Ltd. All rights reserved.

You may use this document or any part of the document for internal or educational purposes only, provided you do not modify, edit or take out of context the information in this document in any manner. You may not use this document in any other manner without the prior written permission of the OMA™. The Open Mobile Alliance authorises you to copy this document, provided that you retain all copyright and other proprietary notices contained in the original materials on any copies of the materials and that you comply strictly with these terms. This copyright permission does not constitute an endorsement of the products or services offered by you .

The OMA™ assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions in this document. In no event shall the Open Mobile Alliance be liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever arising out of or in connection with the use of this information .

Open Mobile Alliance™ members have agreed to use reasonable endeavors to disclose in a timely manner to the Open Mobile Alliance the existence of all intellectual property rights (IPR's) essential to the present document.  However, the members do not have an obligation to conduct IPR searches.  The information received by the members is publicly available to members and non-members of the Open Mobile Alliance and may be found on the 'WAP IPR Declarations' list at http://www.wapforum.org/what/ipr.htm .  Essential IPR is available for license on the basis set out in the schedule to the Open Mobile Alliance Application Form.

No representations or warranties (whether express or implied) are made by the Open Mobile Alliance™ or any Open Mobile Alliance member or its affiliates regarding any of the IPR's represented on this 'WAP IPR Declarations' list, including, but not limited to the accuracy, completeness, validity or relevance of the information or whether or not such rights are essential or non-essential..

Comments regarding this document can be submitted to the OMA™ in the manner published at http://www.wapforum.org/.

## 1. Scope

This document provides changes and corrections to the following document files:

- -OMA-WAP-224-WTP-20010710-a

It includes changes from the following change requests:

- -CR-WTP-20020605-OPENWAVE-1
- -CR-WTP-20020605-OPENWAVE-2
- -CR-WTP-20020403-LOGICA-1

## 2. Notation

In the subsections describing the changes new text is underlined. Removed text has strikethrough marks. The presented text is copied from the specification. Text that is not presented is not affected at all. The change descriptions may also include editor's notes similar to the one below. The notes are not part of the actual changes and must not be included in the changed text.

Editor's note: Framed notes like these only clarify where and how the changes shall be applied.

## 3. Clarification of WTP SAR

## 3.1 Change Classification

Class 3 - Clerical Corrections

## 3.2 Change Summary

These changes clarify the valid interactions which may occur when WTP-SAR is being used in an environment where there are SAR and NON-SAR capable mobile devices and gateways. The issue(s) to be resolved by this change is the settings for Transmission and Group Trailer Flags in the case where SAR is supported/non supported but not used in a transaction and to clarify supporting text in section 8.2.2 of the WTP Specification.

## 3.3 Change Description

Editor's note: modifications to section 10, new subsection 10.6.8

## 10.6.8 SAR, NON-SAR Interactions

The following examples illustrate the interactions that can occur when a SAR capable initiator interacts with a non-SAR capable responder; in the case where SAR is supported but not used in the transaction.

Figure 19: SAR Capable Initiator Communicating to Non SAR Capable Responder

1. The initiator indicates its support for SAR by using the settings for common transmission and group trailer flags (TTR and GTR) as described in table 12, section 8.2.2.
2. The responder indicates its lack of SAR support by using the appropriate settings for GTR and TTR.
3. The initiator acknowledges the received result message.

In the scenario in figure 19 it is also possible that the Responder may Abort the transaction using the reason code NOTIMPLEMENTEDSAR but, as pointed out in section 4.6 Note (1), the responder should consider whether it is necessary to abort. The implication in this notation is that only when a message uses SAR, the NON-SAR Responder should abort (e.g. [TTR=0 GTR=1] or [TTR=0 GTR=0]).

The following illustrates the scenario where a NON-SAR capable is communicating with a SAR capable gateway.

Figure 20: Non-SAR Capable Initiator Communicating to SAR Capable Responder

1. The initiator indicates its lack of support for SAR by using the settings for common transmission and group trailer flags (TTR and GTR) as described in table 12, section 8.2.2.
2. The responder indicates its support of SAR support by using the appropriate settings for GTR and TTR.
3. The initiator acknowledges the received result message.

Editor's note: modifications to descriptive text in section 8.2.2 to clarify 'in the case of SAR'

## 8.2.2. Group Trailer (GTR) and Transmission Trailer (TTR) Flag

…

## &lt;&lt;Table 12&gt;&gt;

The default setting SHOULD be GTR=1 and TTR=1, that is, WTP segmentation and re-assembly not supported. In the case of SAR, In the case where a message uses segmentation, if the TTR flag is set in the last segment, then the GTR flag must be ignored.

## 4. Fix encoding of Class Field

## 4.1 Change Classification

Class 2 - Bug fixes

## 4.2 Change Summary

Correct error in encoding of transaction class in the PDU header.

## 4.3 Change Description

Editor's note: Modifications to Table 14 in section 8.3.1.1

Table 14 Encoding of Class field

|   Class | TCL    |
|---------|--------|
|       0 | 0x00   |
|       1 | 0x01   |
|       2 | 0x1002 |
