## Specification Information Note WAP-191\_105-WML-20020212-a

## Version 12-Feb-2002

for

## Wireless Application Protocol WAP-191-WML-20000219-a Wireless Markup Language Version 1.3, 19-February-2000

You may use this document or any part of the document for internal or educational purposes only, provided you do not modify, edit or take out of context the information in this document in any manner. You may not use this document in any other manner without the prior written permission of the WAP Forum™. The WAP Forum authorises you to copy this document, provided that you retain all copyright and other proprietary notices contained in the original materials on any copies of the materials and that you comply strictly with these terms. This copyright permission does not constitute an endorsement of the products or services offered by you .

The WAP Forum™ assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions in this document. In no event shall the WAP Forum be liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever arising out of or in connection with the use of this information .

WAP Forum™ members have agreed to use reasonable endeavors to disclose in a timely manner to the WAP Forum the existence of all intellectual property rights (IPR's) essential to the present document. The members do not have an obligation to conduct IPR searches. This information is publicly available to members and non-members of the WAP Forum and may be found on the "WAP IPR Declarations" list at http://www.wapforum.org/what/ipr.htm. Essential IPR is available for license on the basis set out in the schedule to the WAP Forum Application Form.

Comments regarding this document can be submitted to the WAP Forum ™ in the manner published at http://www.wapforum.org/.

## 4. CLARIFICATION OF THE GO ELEMENT FOR THE POST METHOD. ............................................................. 6

4.1

CHANGE CLASSIFICATION....................................................................................................................................................6

4.3

CHANGE DESCRIPTION..........................................................................................................................................................6

4.2

CHANGE SUMMARY...............................................................................................................................................................6

## 1. Scope

This document provides changes and corrections to the following document files:

- -WAP-191-WML-20000219-a

It includes changes from the following change requests:

- -CR-IBM-WML1.3-20020131
- -CR-IBM-WML1.3-20020131-A

with modification to specification reference.

## 2. Notation

In the subsections describing the changes new text is underlined. Removed text has strikethrough marks. The presented text is copied from the specification. Text that is not presented is not affected at all. The change descriptions may also include editor's notes similar to the one below. The notes are not part of the actual changes and must not be included in the changed text.

## 3. Addition of SCR for tabindex

## 3.1 Change Classification

Class 2 - Bug Fixes

## 3.2 Change Summary

Problem Report (PR) 2413 pointed out that tabindex is optional for WML user agents and yet does not have a separate SCR to indicate its optionality (Section 11.6.1).

This change adds the necessary SCR to clearly illustrate its optionality and help suppliers declare the devices support for tabindex when certifying their devices.

## 3.3 Change Description

## Section 15.1.5

| WML-C-76   | tabindex support   | 11.6.1   | O   |
|------------|--------------------|----------|-----|

## 4. Clarification of the go element for the Post method.

## 4.1 Change Classification

```
Class 2 - Bug Fixes
```

## 4.2 Change Summary

Problem report (PR) 2414 suggested the text associated with enctype and the use of the post method with multipart/form-data was insufficiently clear with respect to their optionality.

This change clarifies the situation.

Section 9.5.1 is insufficiently clear.

## 4.3 Change Description

## 9.5.1 The Go Element

The go element declares a go task, indicating navigation to a URI. If the URI names a WML card or deck, it is displayed. A go executes a "push" operation on the history stack (see section 9.2). The UA must ignore all postfield elements of a go element if the target of the go element is a card contained within the current deck and if the cache-control is not specified as 'no-cache'. Refer to section 12.5.1 for more information on the semantics of go .

```
```text
<!ENTITY % cache-control '(no-cache)' > <!ELEMENT go (postfield | setvar)*> <!ATTLIST go href %HREF; \#REQUIRED sendreferer %boolean;       "false" method post|get)       "get" enctype %ContentType; "application/x-www-form-urlencoded" cache-control %cache-control; \#IMPLIED accept-charset CDATA           \#IMPLIED %coreattrs; >
```

```
## Attributes

hre f= HREF

The href attribute specifies the destination URI, e.g., the URI of the card to display.

If this attribute is true, the user agent must specify, for the server's benefit, the URI of the deck containing this task (i.e., the referring deck). This allows a server to perform a form of access control on URIs, based on which decks are linking to them. The URI must be the smallest relative URI possible if it can be relative at all. For example, if sendreferer=true , an HTTP based user agent shall indicate the URI of the current deck in the HTTP "Referer" request header [RFC2616].

```
sendreferer= boolean
```

method =(post|get)

```
cache-control= no-cache
```

This attribute specifies the HTTP submission method. Currently, the values of get and post are accepted and cause the user agent to perform an HTTP GET or POST respectively.

If the 'cache-control' attribute is present, and the value is set to 'no-cache', the client MUST reload the URL from the origin server. This attribute represents the HTTP 'cache-control' header, when this attribute is present, the HTTP 'cache-control' header MUST be added to the request with the same value as specified in the attribute.

```
enctype= ContentType
```

This attribute specifies the content type used to submit the parameter to the server (when the value of method is post). The default value for this attribute is application/x-www-form-urlencoded . Currently, only application/x-www-form-urlencoded or multipart/form-data can be specified. When the field values in a submitted form may contain characters not in the US-ASCII character set, it is recommended that the post method and optional multipart/form-data [RFC2388] are used. User agents must explicitly specify content type for each part. If a part corresponds to a postfield element, its content type should be text/plain . The charset parameter is required when the content contains characters not in the US-ASCII character set.

This attribute specifies the list of character encodings for data that the origin server accepts when processing input. When the go task is executed and method="post" has been specified, the user agent should encode the field names and values of all associated postfield elements using any one of the specified character sets.

## accept-charset= cdata

The value of this attribute is a comma- or space-separated list of character encoding names ( charset ) as specified in [RFC2045] and [RFC2616]. The IANA Character Set registry defines the public registry for charset values.

## Attributes defined elsewhere

If the accept-charset attribute is not specified or is the reserved string unknown , user agents should use the  character encoding that was used to transmit the WML deck that contains the go element.

- id (see section 8.9)
- class (see section 8.9)

The go element may contain one or more postfield elements. These elements specify information to be submitted to the origin server during the request. The submission of field data is performed in the following manner:

1. The field name/value pairs are identified and all variables are substituted.
2. The user agent should transcode the field names and values to the correct character set, as specified explicitly by the accept-charset or implicitly by the document encoding.
3. If the href attribute value is an HTTP URI, the request is performed according to the method and enctype attribute's value:

| Method   | Enctype                             | Process                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|----------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| get      | application/x- www-form- urlencoded | The field names and values are escaped using URI-escaping and assembled into an application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type. The submission data is appended to the query component of the URI. The result must be a valid query component with the original query part and the postfields combined. An HTTP GET operation is performed on the resulting URL. |
| get      | multipart/form-data                 | Error.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| post     | application/x- www-form- urlencoded | The field names and values are escaped using URI-escaping and assembled into an application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type. The submission data is sent as the body of the HTTP POST request. The Content-Type header must include the charset parameter to indicate the character encoding.                                                                 |
| post     | multipart/form- data                | The field names and values are encoded as a multipart/form-data content type as defined in [RFC2388]. The Content-Type header must include the charset parameter to indicate the character encoding when the part contains characters not in the US-ASCII character set. The submission data is sent as the body of the HTTP POST request.                       |

When enctype attribute's value is application/x-www-form-urlencoded , the field names and values must be encoded as follows:

1. The field names and values are escaped using URI-escaping, and listed in the order in which the postfields are presented.
2. The name is separated from the value by `=' and name/value pairs are separated from each other by `&amp;'. See [RFC2396] for more information on the URI syntax and its escape sequence.

It is recommended that user agents submit data with the optionalan application/vnd.wap.multipart.formdata content type when enctype attribute has a value of multipart/form-data . Some user agents may only support data submission using the defaultas application/x-www-form-urlencoded content type. Such user agents may ignore enctype attribute. Thus, it is recommended that an origin server expect either form of submission (i.e., multipart/form-data or application/x-www-form-urlencoded ) when the enctype value is multipart/form-data . However, the origin server may assume that it will only receive an application/xwww-form-urlencoded submission when the enctype value is application/x-www-form-urlencoded .

For example, the following go element would cause an HTTP GET request to the URL

```
"/foo?x=1": <go href="/foo"> <postfield name="x" value="1"/> </go> The following example will cause an HTTP POST to the URL "/bar" with a message entity containing "w=12&y=test" : <go href="/bar" method="post"> <postfield name="w" value="12"/> <postfield name="y" value="test"/> </go>
```

| Conformance Rules:   |                                                      |    |
|----------------------|------------------------------------------------------|----|
| WML-C-29             | go                                                   | M  |
| WML-C-77             | Support for enctype                                  | O  |
| WML-C-78             | Support for application/vnd.wap.multipart.form- data | O  |

## 15.1.5 Elements

| Item     | Element                                              | Reference   | Status   | Requirement   |
|----------|------------------------------------------------------|-------------|----------|---------------|
| WML-C-77 | Support for enctype                                  | 9.5.1       | O        |               |
| WML-C-78 | Support for application/vnd.wap.multipart.form- data | 9.5.1       | O        | WML-C-77      |
